
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 8 
PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT RECOMMENDATIONS
WE RECOMMEND THAT:
1 government develop long-term goals for catastrophic earthquake preparedness, 
including the level of preparedness it expects EMBC to achieve in the next ,  
and  years.
2 government ensures EMBC has the capacity necessary to address identified 
critical gaps and achieve governments expected level of preparedness.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT BC 
RECOMMENDATIONS
WE RECOMMEND THAT:
3 EMBC develop a strategic plan to meet the Provinces long-term goals. The 
plan should clearly demonstrate how EMBC will evaluate the effectiveness of 
its activities against its goals.
4 EMBC identify, rank and prioritize completion of its own key plans and 
procedures to ensure it meets its mandate to prepare and respond to a 
catastrophic earthquake.
5 EMBC regularly review its earthquake program to identify significant gaps 
and risks to a coordinated and integrated response, and develop actions to 
address them.
6 EMBC regularly review and evaluate its stakeholders emergency plans and 
procedures to assess stakeholder readiness and capacity.
7 EMBC conduct regular catastrophic earthquake exercises with its stakeholders 
to ensure it can deliver an effective, comprehensive and integrated 
government-wide response to a catastrophic earthquake.
8 EMBC measure the effectiveness of its public preparedness initiatives at 
regular intervals.
9 EMBC report annually to British Columbians on the state of its catastrophic 
earthquake preparedness. The report should include an assessment of the overall 
state of earthquake preparedness, risks and capacity, and describe the plans and 
achievements of the Inter-Agency Emergency Preparedness Council (IEPC).
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
RESPONSE FROM THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE
 9 
T M  J acknowledges the conscientious and thorough 
work carried out by the audit team during its review of Emergency Management British 
Columbias (EMBC) preparedness for a catastrophic earthquake and would like to 
acknowledge the efforts of the people, both inside and outside of the ministry, who have 
been involved with this review.
The Auditor General has recognized that preparing for a catastrophic earthquake is a 
shared responsibility. EMBC accepts its key role in this regard. Staff are continually 
working with local governments, regional districts, provincial ministries, Crown agencies, 
volunteers, non-governmental organizations, the Federal Government, First Nations and 
governments from other jurisdictions, to ensure that BC is well prepared to respond to a 
catastrophic event.
The ministry and EMBC accept the Auditor Generals findings regarding catastrophic 
earthquake preparedness. 
As a leader in the provinces emergency management services, EMBC must balance the 
need to respond to immediate emergencies, including fire, flooding, avalanches, spills 
and landslides, with its mandate to ensure preparedness for a catastrophic incident of 
provincial significance. EMBC responded to approximately , such emergencies in 
 alone. These types of events contribute to learning that is applied to EMBCs evolving 
catastrophic event preparedness.
Immediate actions are being taken to address many of the key issues identified by the 
audit. Furthermore, a long-term plan for catastrophic earthquake preparedness is being 
developed that will ultimately address all of the findings contained in this report.
In responding to the audit report, the ministry has grouped some of the related 
recommendations. The first two recommendations of the Auditor General are directed 
to the Provincial Government. With respect to these recommendations, Emergency 
Management BC will work with its colleagues across government to ensure that 
appropriate actions are taken. 
RECOMMENDATION 1: We recommend that the government develop long-
term goals for catastrophic earthquake preparedness, including the level of preparedness 
it expects EMBC to achieve in the next , , and  years.
EMBC will develop a long-term plan that articulates provincial goals regarding 
catastrophic earthquake preparedness, and a phased approach for achieving these goals.
RECOMMENDATION 2: We recommend that the government ensures EMBC 
has the capacity necessary to address identified critical gaps and achieve governments 
expected level of preparedness.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
RESPONSE FROM THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE
 10 
EMBC will continue to use its existing resources as efficiently and effectively as possible. 
At the same time, it will continue to work with partner agencies and stakeholders to 
promote alignment of efforts. The ministry will embark on a consultative review with 
other partners to ensure that a more complete understanding of overall stakeholder 
preparedness is achieved.
RECOMMENDATION 3: We recommend that EMBC develop a strategic plan 
to meet the Provinces long-term goals. The plan should clearly demonstrate how EMBC 
will evaluate the effectiveness of its activities against its goals.
RECOMMENDATION 4: We recommend that EMBC identify, rank and 
prioritize completion of its own key plans and procedures to meet its mandate to prepare 
and respond to a catastrophic earthquake.
The spring  update to EMBCs overall strategic plan will identify preparation for 
catastrophic seismic events as a priority. Further, EMBCs long-term plan for catastrophic 
earthquake preparedness, will include goals, prioritized activities and an evaluation 
framework to assess how those goals are being achieved.
RECOMMENDATION 5: We recommend that EMBC regularly review 
its earthquake program to identify significant gaps and risks to a coordinated and 
integrated response, and develop actions to address them.
A key element of EMBCs long-term plan for catastrophic earthquake preparedness will be 
regular assessment of risks, gaps, and opportunities for program improvement.
RECOMMENDATION 6: We recommend that EMBC regularly review and 
evaluate its stakeholders plans and procedures to assess stakeholder readiness and 
capacity.
The ministry will formally engage with stakeholders to determine what processes would 
be most effective to promote mutual awareness and alignment of plans and capacities. This 
will be part of the ministrys consultative review.
RECOMMENDATION 7: We recommend that EMBC conduct regular 
catastrophic earthquake exercises with stakeholders to ensure an effective, comprehensive 
and integrated government-wide response to a catastrophic earthquake.
The catastrophic earthquake preparedness plan that is referenced in other responses will 
include regular earthquake exercises with stakeholders. This plan will adopt a measured 
and progressive approach, characterized by appropriately phased increases in exercise 
scope and complexity.
RECOMMENDATION 8: We recommend that EMBC measure the 
effectiveness of public preparedness initiatives at regular intervals. 
EMBCs long-term plan for catastrophic earthquake preparedness will include public 
education activities and monitoring of these activities. In addition to ongoing public 
education efforts, a focused campaign will be conducted to bridge gaps in knowledge and 
encourage behaviour that will improve the provinces overall resiliency.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
RESPONSE FROM THE MINISTRY OF JUSTICE
 11 
RECOMMENDATION 9: We recommend that EMBC report annually to 
British Columbians on the state of earthquake preparedness including an assessment of 
the overall state of earthquake preparedness, risk and capacity, and describe the plans 
and achievements of the Inter-Agency Emergency Preparedness Council (IEPC).
EMBCs long-term plan for catastrophic earthquake preparedness will include 
an  annual report to British Columbians. This will provide an opportunity to keep 
emergency preparedness at the forefront of priorities for individuals, families, 
stakeholders and government partners.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT
 12 
Exhibit 1: The destructive power of earthquakes
BACKGROUND
In recent years, destructive earthquakes and tsunamis have occurred in many regions 
of the world. The devastating human impact and economic loss resulting from these 
seismic events means years, and in some cases, decades of recovery (see Exhibit ).
The majority of BCs population lives in a highly 
active earthquake zone
Southwestern British Columbia is situated in the Pacific Ring of Fire, an area where 
some of the worlds largest earthquakes occur. Most of the areas at highest risk in the 
province are also the areas with the highest population density (see Exhibit ).
Debris crushed a car outside the Christchurch 
Exhibit 2: Earthquake hazard mapCatholic Cathedral after a .-magnitude 
earthquake hit Christchurch, New Zealand, 
Feb. , .
Source: New Zealand Press Association
FORT NELSONFORT NELSON
FORT ST. JOHNFORT ST. JOHN
DAWSON CREEKDAWSON CREEK
PRINCE RUPERT PRINCE RUPERT 
MASSETMASSET
PRINCE GEORGEPRINCE GEORGE
WILLIAMS LAKEWILLIAMS LAKE
Relative Hazard
High
PORT HARDYPORT HARDYKAMLOOPSKAMLOOPS
COURTENAYCOURTENAYKELOWNAKELOWNA
CRANBROOKCRANBROOK
VANCOUVERVANCOUVER
LowNANAIMONANAIMO
VICTORIAVICTORIA
Source: Natural Resources Canada
Every year, a few thousand earthquakes occur in and adjacent to BC, but most result in 
little or no damage. According to experts, however, an earthquake capable of causing 
structural damage can be expected to occur somewhere in the province about once 
every  years.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT
 13 
Catastrophic earthquakes are less frequent but would result in a high number of 
casualties and evacuees. In this category of earthquake, response capabilities and 
resources of the local governments will likely be overwhelmed, life saving support from 
outside the area will be required, and the event would likely have long-term impacts 
within the incident area as well as, to a lesser extent, on the nation (see Exhibit ).
Exhibit 3: Effects of earthquakes of varying strengths
Category Effects Richter 
Scale
I. Instrumental Not felt- 
II.  Just Perceptible Felt by only a few people on upper floors of tall buildings  
III.  Slight Felt by people lying down, seated on hard surfaces, or in the upper floors of tall buildings . 
IV.  Perceptible Felt indoors by many, by few outside, and windows rattle  
V. Rather Strong Generally felt by everyone; sleeping people may be awakened .
VI.  Strong Trees sway, chandeliers swing, bells ring, some damage from falling objects  
VII. Very Strong General alarm; walls and plaster crack . 
Felt in moving vehicles; chimneys collapse; poorly constructed buildings seriously 
VIII..  Destructive 
damaged 
IX.  Ruinous Some houses collapse; pipes break.
X.  Disastrous Obvious ground cracks; railroad tracks bent; some landslides on steep hills  
Few buildings survive; bridges damaged or destroyed; all services interrupted (electrical, 
XI. Very Disastrous. 
water, sewage, railroad); severe landslides 
XII.Catastrophic Total destruction; objects thrown into the air; river courses and topography altered 

The strength of an earthquake does not necessarily equate to the corresponding 
effects shown in Exhibit . For example, the  Haida Gwaii earthquake was a 
magnitude .; yet, there was little damage associated with this earthquake. However, 
the  earthquake in New Zealand was a magnitude . and it resulted in  deaths 
and approximately $ billion in economic loss due to the close proximity of the 
earthquakes epicentre to Christchurch. The damage that occurs is also related to the 
type of earthquake that can occur. BCs earthquake profile includes three types of 
earthquakes: mega-thrust, deep-focus and shallow-focus. Each of these types creates a 
different pattern of damage (See Appendix A for more details).
March ,  marks the th anniversary of the . magnitude Great Alaskan 
Earthquake, one of the largest earthquakes recorded in recent history. Energy released 
from an earthquake of this magnitude is equivalent to the explosion of over , 
megatons of TNT or over , combined Hiroshima-Nagasaki atomic bombs (See 
Appendix B for other recorded earthquakes).
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 14 
That  mega-thrust quake triggered a powerful tsunami that resulted in structural 
Exhibit 4: Results of the tsunami that struck  
damage and human causalities as it travelled down the North American coast and west Port Alberni in 1964
to Japan. Locally, the tsunami seriously impacted the west coast of Vancouver Island. 
At least four waves hit Port Alberni, washing away  homes and damaging  others. 
Surprisingly, no deaths were reported in BC, but damage in the province was estimated 
at over $ million in current dollars (see Exhibit ).
Experts estimate there is a % probability of a similar catastrophic earthquake and tsunami 
affecting BC in the next  years. A recent report by the Insurance Bureau of Canada 
estimates that if such an earthquake were to occur off the south coast of the province and be 
followed by a tsunami, damages and losses could amount to nearly $ billion.
As populations and infrastructure continue to grow in these earthquake vulnerable 
areas of BC, the severity of the economic impacts  in addition to the serious potential 
for loss of life  will only increase.
Emergency management is a shared responsibility
Emergency management in BC is a shared responsibility and is founded on an escalating 
response model (see Exhibit ).
 At the basic level, individuals are responsible for taking actions to protect themselves.Source: Iain McKain, Province files
 When an emergency extends beyond individual capabilities, local authorities are 
expected to lead the response, with regional coordination necessary where impacts 
are multi-jurisdictional.
 When local authorities are overwhelmed, the provincial government needs to take a 
strong leadership role to mitigate the effects of the emergency. In this situation, the 
Province will be responsible for acquiring and deploying the necessary resources to 
help affected areas and for coordinating and leading a multiple agency response to 
meet established provincial priorities.
 Finally, if the provincial government requires resources beyond its own capacity, it 
can ask the federal government or other jurisdictions for assistance.
Exhibit 5: Emergency management is a shared responsibility
L GOVERNM
ERAE
N
D
ET
F
PROVINCIAL G
LO
AV
UE
DR
I
N
V
IM
DShared E
NIN
ResponsibilityT
Y
P
RT
I
I
VR
AO
T
EH
 ST
ECTORLOCAL AU
Source: Adapted from EMBC Training Manual
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 15 
Provincial roles and responsibilities during a catastrophic 
earthquake
In BC, emergency management is based on four interconnected areas of responsibility 
(pillars)(See Exhibit ):
. mitigation and prevention;
. preparedness;
. response; and
. recovery.
Exhibit 6: Four pillars approach to comprehensive emergency management
N
NTIO
VEPRE
REP
 PAR
 &COE
NoD
 Riskp
oe
rr
datN
IOceii
noE
TanS
edu
ta
elS
ARd R
G 
IAe
a
p
Td
Ipi
rn
oe
M
as
cs
h
R
e
s
t
o
 orINCIDENT
fe
 d
O
R/
EpC
ense
h
Cro
anpoit
Ott
i
Voin
nu Res Wes
Esityce
RIntegratedriti
Y In Accordan
 Prio
SE
 Strategic
ON
RESP
Source:  Adapted from Public Safety Canadas Emergency Management Planning Guide
The authority and responsibility for three of these areas is established in the Emergency 
Program Act and the Emergency Program Management Regulation. The fourth area, 
mitigation and prevention, is currently not recognized in the Act. The Provincial 
Emergency Program (PEP) is the agency charged with meeting the requirements set 
out in the Act and Regulation which includes creating provincial emergency plans and 
responding to or alleviating the effects of an emergency or disaster.
In , the responsibilities of PEP were folded into Emergency Management BC (EMBC).  
EMBC is also the coordinating agency for the provincial governments emergency management 
activities and includes the duties for the Provincial Emergency Program, the Office of the Fire 
Commissioner and the Coroners Service. The vision of EMBC is to ensure public safety and 
save lives through excellence in emergency management leadership.
The diversity of BCs climate and geography creates a number of natural hazards including 
earthquakes, blizzards, wildfires, floods and landslides to which EMBC is tasked to respond. 
In addition, there are a number of human-caused hazards for EMBC to deal with including 
oil spills, motor vehicle accidents and electrical power outages. To respond to the numerous 
hazards that BC is subject to, EMBC adopted an all-hazard approach to emergency 
management and developed an All-Hazard Plan in . This approach recognizes that 
most disasters ultimately result in similar impacts and risks that need to be dealt with. 
This all-hazard approach is considered good practice because it allows governments and 
organizations to efficiently develop a single set of plans and procedures to deal with as many 
of these common impacts and risks as possible.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 16 
Previous audit work in this area
To date, the provincial government has invested considerable resources in assessing BCs 
level of preparedness for a catastrophic earthquake, identifying gaps in preparedness, and 
suggesting areas of improvement.
In an audit of this topic by our Office in , we investigated the level of BCs preparedness 
for a catastrophic earthquake and what actions were needed to raise the level of preparedness 
to an adequate standard. In that report, the Auditor General concluded that the provincial 
government, the Provincial Emergency Program (now EMBC) and local governments 
were not well prepared for a catastrophic earthquake, and made  recommendations (see 
Appendix C).
Following that report, the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts issued its own 
report in , supporting the Auditor Generals  conclusions, and made an additional 
 recommendations (All recommendations have been summarized in Appendix D).
In , the Provinces Internal Audit and Advisory Service evaluated EMBCs emergency 
management preparedness and response, reaching some similar conclusions to these two 
earlier public reports and made  recommendations.
AUDIT OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE
We conducted this audit to answer the following questions:
. Can EMBC demonstrate that it is prepared to manage the effects of a catastrophic 
earthquake?
. Is EMBC reporting publicly on the Provinces preparedness for a catastrophic 
earthquake?
As stated earlier and shown in Exhibit , emergency management is built on  pillars: 
mitigation and prevention, preparedness, response and recovery. For the purposes of 
this audit, we focused solely on EMBCs preparedness to plan for an effective response 
to a catastrophic earthquake. Unlike our  audit which had a much broader scope, 
mitigation and prevention, response and recovery were out of scope for this audit, and we 
did not audit other provincial ministries or local governments. However, it is important to 
note that other stakeholders and the other three pillars are critical and should be part of 
EMBCs overall strategy.
We developed our criteria and expectations for this audit based on the assumption that in 
the  years since our  audit on this topic, EMBC had sufficient time to significantly 
improve its level of preparedness. We also expected to find that EMBC has been reporting 
to the public and the Legislative Assembly about the state of readiness achieved in this 
time, and the future state of preparedness that it is working towards.
We carried out interviews between March and November , and the audit team 
reviewed relevant documentation primarily for the years  through .
We conducted the audit in accordance with Section () of the Auditor General Act and 
the standards for assurance engagement established by the Canadian Institute of Chartered 
Accountants.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 17 
AUDIT CONCLUSION
We concluded that:
 EMBC cannot demonstrate that it is adequately prepared to manage the effects of a 
catastrophic earthquake; and
 EMBC is not reporting to the public and the Legislative Assembly about how 
prepared it is for managing the effects of a catastrophic earthquake.
KEY FINDINGS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS
In summarizing our key findings and recommendations below, we also note 
recommendations that our Office made in  on earthquake preparedness that 
are still relevant. Our purpose is to show that many of the issues we identified then 
remain unaddressed.
EMBC is not adequately prepared to manage the 
effects of a catastrophic earthquake
Catastrophic earthquake preparedness has not been made a 
priority
British Columbia (BC) has never experienced a catastrophic earthquake in a densely 
populated urban centre and may not for many years. Experts have noted that this 
has led to public apathy and a lack of urgency for decision makers. Given the human 
casualties and economic impact suffered from other jurisdictions in recent years (see 
Exhibit ), this complacency is worrisome and unwarranted.
Government representatives are elected to make policy decisions and must regularly 
make choices between which initiatives to fund and which to decline. Funding for a 
catastrophic earthquake that may or may not occur in the short-term competes with 
funding requests for more immediate needs, such as health care and public education.
Exhibit 7: Earthquake/tsunami impacts
Reported Casualties Estimated Economic Impact (not including impacts 
Region Magnitude and Injuries to neighboring countries) in Current Dollars
 deaths  
Christchurch, New Zealand ().$ Billion Cdn
,-, injuries
, deaths 
Tohoku, Japan ().$ Billion Cdn
, injuries
Chile (). deaths$- Billion Cdn
Anchorage, Alaska (). deaths$. Billion Cdn
Source: Prepared by the Office of the Auditor General of British Columbia 
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 18 
EMBCs operation centre, staffed  hours a day seven days a week, receives about 
, calls annually. EMBC responded to approximately , incidents related 
to dangerous goods spills, search and rescue events, major floods, fires, landslides, 
and avalanches in . While only a fraction of these emergencies may require an 
extensive response by EMBC, they consume the majority of staff time. At the same 
time, EMBCs lack of critical resources such as a logistics planner and its limited 
funding constrain the organizations abilities.
EMBCs current operating budget for emergency activities is approximately $. 
million. This budget is about the same as the budget provided to PEP in , 
despite a % population increase over the same time period, a near doubling of BCs 
property values, and knowledge of the devastating impacts of recent earthquakes in 
Chile, Japan, and New Zealand.
EMBCs mandate is very broad and includes emergency coordination and the 
planning and mitigation of all hazards in BC including catastrophic earthquakes. 
In the context of this broad mandate and the lack of critical positions and no new 
funding, EMBCs planning and preparation for a catastrophic earthquake often 
occurs as a side-of-desk activity.
Many of EMBCs deficiencies in its response capabilities were highlighted following 
the . magnitude earthquake that occurred in Haida Gwaii on October , . The 
event triggered a tsunami warning. Fortunately, there was no tsunami, no reported 
injuries and only limited damage. As per good practices, EMBC drafted an after 
action report of the event that identified shortcomings in the Provinces response 
and actions to address these issues.
In this report, EMBC noted that it did not have sufficient personnel with the experience, 
knowledge and training to effectively respond to an earthquake and tsunami event and its 
standard operation procedures were inadequate. EMBC also noted that:
 some local governments identified that their plans were not adequate;
 a number of communities lacked information and education on what to do and 
what local responders should do; and
 the use of the Provincial Emergency Notification System is cumbersome, 
resource-consuming and prone to errors.
EMBC included strategies to improve its performance based on its current capacity. 
It also identified that risks to communities would continue without additional 
resources and program enhancements.
Although government officials continue to state that catastrophic earthquake 
preparedness is a priority, government has not provided clear direction regarding the 
degree of preparedness it is committed to attain or what level of risk is acceptable. In 
our view, given the scope of preparation that will be required to adequately prepare 
BC for a catastrophic earthquake, government should be planning for ,  and  
years rather than the typical  to  year plans.
[Audit   Recommendation   The provincial government should develop 
long-term goals for earthquake preparedness.]
 The Province also contributes approximately $ million dollars to a joint federal and provincial initiative 
to fund infrastructure projects that will provide flood protection to communities across BC.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 19 
[Audit   Recommendation   The provincial government should provide 
the Provincial Emergency Program with a reasonable level of resources to meet the 
governments expectations.]
RECOMMENDATION 1: We recommend that government develop long-
term goals for catastrophic earthquake preparedness, including the level of provincial 
preparedness it expects EMBC to achieve in the next ,  and  years.
RECOMMENDATION 2: We recommend that government ensures EMBC 
has the capacity necessary to address identified critical gaps and achieve governments 
expected level of preparedness.
EMBC has not implemented a managing-for-results framework 
in preparing for a catastrophic earthquake
As was evidenced in Japan in , no government can be completely ready to respond to 
a catastrophic earthquake (see Exhibit ). However, we expected EMBC to have a system 
in place to track and demonstrate how it is improving the Provinces level of preparedness.
Managing-for-results provides an organizations leadership with tools to measure its 
success and identify areas for improvement so goals can be achieved. The general 
principles of this framework are part of the planning requirements under the Provinces 
Core Policy and Procedures Manual. The managing-for-results framework is valuable 
because it embodies the old adage that what gets measured gets done.
Exhibit 8: Being totally prepared is not possible
Despite Japans investment of billions of dollars in earthquake and tsunami 
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery, the scale of destruction during 
the March ,  tsunami quickly overwhelmed authorities.
Source: BBC News
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 20 
The managing-for-results framework can be conceptualized as a simple four-step process 
known as Plan-Do-Check-Adjust (PDCA) (see Exhibit ). These steps are the foundation 
for International Organization for Standardization (ISO) . The ISO  family of 
standards represents an international consensus on good management practices.
Exhibit 9: The Plan-Do-Check-Adjust (PDCA) model that underpins the managing-
for-results approach
ANnizeD
LO
P Orga
aC
no
 and
dm
te Imm
u
rea
pn
l
Ceic
ma
et
e
n
t
Continual
Improvement
R
e
v
ie
w
 at
nc
Ad
D re
R
Jeor
Uvis C
Se
T and
Monitor
K
EC
CH
Source: Adapted from W.E. Deming approach
We expected EMBC management, using this four-step process, to have undertaken the 
following key initiatives: 
PLAN: Establish the objectives and processes necessary to deliver results in preparing 
for a catastrophic earthquake. Establish key performance indicators and targets to 
evaluate success. 
DO: Implement the plan and collect information on performance. 
CHECK: Evaluate results and identify areas for improvements. 
ADJUST: Revise work plans as necessary throughout the year to ensure results are 
being achieved. Annually review overall performance and adjust objectives, strategies, 
key performance indicators and work plans as needed for the following year.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 21 
We found that EMBC has made progress in some areas; however, overall EMBC is not 
applying a rigorous managing-for-results framework and has gaps in the following areas:
PLAN: A goal in EMBCs  Strategic Plan is to enhance BCs ability to 
manage large scale and catastrophic events. Five objectives for achieving this goal have 
been identified (see Exhibit ).
Exhibit 10: Extract from EMBC Strategic Plan 20122015
Goal  - Enhance British Columbias ability to manage large scale and catastrophic events
 Align EMBC staff resources to support major event response and recovery capacity
 Build and support local, provincial, national and international liaison 
agreements and networks
 Build public/private sector agreements and partnerships
 Monitor stakeholder readiness and capacity
 Coordinate provincial support to local authorities and First Nations engaged in 
emergency management
 
Source: EMBCs Strategic Plan 
We found that EMBC could not demonstrate that these objectives were based on a 
systematic assessment of areas of highest risk or significant gaps in its program.
In addition, EMBC does not have a catastrophic earthquake work plan that defines 
the strategies for how these objectives will be realized, nor have they identified key 
performance indicators and related annual targets to measure its progress.
DO: Although EMBC does not have a catastrophic earthquake annual work plan, 
the agency has undertaken actions to improve the Provinces preparedness for a 
catastrophic earthquake. However, we found that implementation of these actions has 
often had to be secondary to other operational activities, so progress has been slow.
CHECK: Because of the absence of key performance indicators and associated annual 
targets for improving EMBCs preparedness for a catastrophic earthquake, the agency 
is not objectively evaluating whether its actions are improving its preparedness. We 
did find, however, that EMBC recently created status reports for its top three priority 
projects. These reports could be expanded so EMBC can monitor its progress once it 
determines the key outcomes that it is working to achieve.
ADJUST: EMBC does not regularly evaluate the effectiveness of its earthquake 
preparedness activities and adjust its programs, plans and procedures. However, we did 
note that the agency adjusted some of its plans and procedures in response to recent 
evaluations. Notably, EMBC identified opportunities for improvements after attending 
a large-scale earthquake exercise in Washington State, and in relation to the tsunami 
threat following the  Haida Gwaii earthquake.
RECOMMENDATION 3: We recommend that EMBC develop a strategic 
plan to meet the Provinces long-term goals. The plan should clearly demonstrate how 
EMBC will evaluate the effectiveness of its activities against its goals.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 22 
Gaps exist in EMBCs preparedness
The Provinces response to a catastrophic earthquake will depend largely on the 
effectiveness of the plans and procedures that EMBC and other stakeholders have in 
place and how well they are implemented. We, therefore, expected that EMBCs plans 
and procedures:
. are based on a detailed hazard risk and vulnerability analysis;
. are reflective of best practices;
. include the actions that the Minister may undertake in a state of emergency;
. include the review of ministry and local government plans and procedures to ensure 
they are integrated and coordinated;
. include monitoring of key stakeholders readiness and capacity to carry out their plans;
. include catastrophic earthquake training and exercises; and
. include maintaining an effective public education program.
Following are our findings for each of the above seven areas.
1.  EMBCs hazard, risk and vulnerability analysis is not 
sufficiently detailed and not up-to-date
We expected EMBC to have developed a detailed hazard risk and vulnerability analysis 
(HRVA) based on a scenario of a catastrophic earthquake that would then be used to 
guide the development of its response plans and procedures. An HRVA is a critical part 
of every emergency program. An HRVA assists emergency managers in prioritizing 
their mitigation and planning efforts, and in determining where to focus their resources 
during the initial response to a catastrophic earthquake.
Consistent with the requirements of the Emergency Program Management Regulation 
and international good practice, EMBC is required to prepare and update annually an 
HRVA that identifies potential emergencies and disasters, and to assess the potential 
impact of these events on people and property. EMBCs own guidance states that an 
HRVA should be completed before a strategic plan or an emergency response plan is 
written, as an HRVA guides response actions. However, EMBCs HRVA, developed 
in , has not been updated since this time and is general in its content. It was 
anticipated in our  report that this general HRVA would be developed into an area-
specific HRVA that would model, in detail, the hazards, risks and potential impacts of a 
catastrophic earthquake on the BC population, tourists, critical facilities, disaster routes 
and industry. EMBC has made little progress in this area. However, EMBC recently 
applied for funding from the federal government to work on the development of a model 
that could identify regions of high seismic risk and highest potential losses. The proposed 
project will require a more comprehensive and centralized inventory and mapping of the 
provinces critical infrastructure than is currently available.
[Audit   Recommendation   Provincial Emergency Program should work 
with regional and local governments to refine the development of specific, regional 
earthquake planning scenarios.]
[Audit   Recommendation   The provincial government should develop 
an inventory of key provincial infrastructure.]
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 23 
2.  EMBCs plans and procedures do not consistently reflect 
best practices
We expected EMBCs catastrophic earthquake plans and procedures to reflect best 
practices; however, we found deficiencies in several areas.
 Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan  Consistent with international 
good practices, EMBC is developing a Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan 
which consists of an All-Hazard Plan; support appendices; and hazard-specific 
appendices. However, while EMBC has recently completed the All-Hazard Plan, it 
has not developed a hazard-specific appendix for a catastrophic earthquake or key 
support appendices related to issues that would arise following such an earthquake 
(for example, the need for mass evacuation and shelter, critical infrastructure, and 
food and water). A timetable has not been set for completing these documents.
 BC Emergency Response Management System (BCERMS)  EMBC has 
successfully developed and implemented the BCERMS. This system, based on best 
practices, provides a standardized process for organizing and managing a response 
to any emergency or disaster in BC.
 Earthquake Response Plan  Building on the BCERMS model, EMBC developed 
a draft Earthquake Response Plan in  which describes a general operational 
concept for a provincial response to a damaging earthquake. However, we found 
that this plan does not meet EMBCs own good practice expectations. The plan 
does not:
 identify vulnerable geographic locations, populations and facilities/infrastructure;
 specify public warning/information requirements;
 identify special resource requirements and procedures for locating resources; and
 refer to other emergency-related plans.
Furthermore, the plan includes the assumptions that all BC residents in earthquake-
prone areas of the province know what to do in an earthquake  for example, 
that all families have emergency kits, family reunification plans, and the ability to 
sustain themselves for a period of time until help is available. The plan also assumes 
that local governments have adequate plans and will survive to coordinate their 
own local response and recovery efforts. We noted that EMBC has not confirmed 
that these assumptions are realistic. Recent studies indicate that a majority of the 
population in BCs earthquake hazard area do not know how to prepare their homes 
and themselves for a catastrophic earthquake. 
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 24 
3.  EMBCs plans and procedures do not articulate clearly the 
actions that the Minister may undertake in a provincial state 
of emergency
We expected EMBCs plans and procedures to include the actions that the Minister of 
Justice can take in a provincial state of emergency.
A catastrophic earthquake resulting in significant structural damage and human 
casualties will most likely require the declaration of a provincial state of emergency. 
Section  of the Emergency Program Act sets out the extraordinary powers available to 
the Minister following such a declaration.
Those powers include:
 control or prohibition of travel;
 demolition of structures;
 restoration of essential facilities;
 distribution of essential supplies;
 mass evacuation and shelter;
 price setting; and
 rationing of supplies for the duration of the state of emergency.
EMBC is responsible for emergency management under the Act, so it has an important 
role in supporting the Ministers enactment of these powers. Because an immediate 
emergency response is critical to minimizing loss and damage from a catastrophic 
earthquake, it is essential that EMBC has necessary information and defined 
procedures in place to empower the Minister to make fully informed decisions and 
execute his/her powers in a timely manner.
We found, however, that EMBC has not compiled the necessary information and 
procedures to address all the powers granted to the Minister under a provincial state 
of emergency. This creates the risk that the personal, structural and financial losses 
following a catastrophic earthquake could be greater than necessary due to a delay in 
implementation of these powers.
RECOMMENDATION 4: We recommend that EMBC identify, rank 
and prioritize completion of its own key plans and procedures to ensure it meets its 
mandate to prepare and respond to a catastrophic earthquake.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 25 
4.  EMBC has not adequately ensured plans and procedures 
of other stakeholders would result in an integrated and 
coordinated response
One of EMBCs primary objectives in preparing for a catastrophic earthquake is to 
ensure that the Province undertakes a coordinated and integrated response to the 
event. This objective reflects one of the basic principles of emergency management: 
coherency of action (see Exhibit ). Taking this approach means EMBC would help 
coordinate and lead government and non-government agency assistance with local, 
provincial and even national resources to ensure provincial priorities are achieved and 
communities in need receive the help that they require as quickly as possible.
Exhibit 11: Principle 5 - coherency of action
Emergency management requires collaboration, coordination and integration by 
all partners in order to most effectively apply emergency management resources 
and execute activities. Coherency of action relies on clear roles, responsibilities, 
authorities and capacities of all partners.
Source: Principles of Emergency Management, EMBC Reference Manual
For this approach to work properly, the response efforts and plans of all these different 
stakeholders must be integrated and coordinated. However, we found that EMBC does 
not systematically review these plans and procedures and, therefore, cannot ensure that 
they are integrated and coordinated.
4.1  Local authorities plans are not reviewed by EMBC to ensure integration 
and coordination
EMBCs legislation and regulation define a number of mandatory and discretionary 
powers and duties of the Minister. The mandatory actions state that the Minister 
must do something; the discretionary actions state that the minister may do 
something. In either case, the legislation empowers the Minister to do whatever is 
necessary to prevent, respond to or alleviate the effects of a catastrophic earthquake.
Under the Act, the Minister may promote the development of integrated plans and 
require local authorities  to prepare, in cooperation with designated ministries, 
integrated plans and programs, satisfactory to the Minister, to deal with emergencies. We 
found that EMBC has not exercised this power to ensure that local government plans are 
coordinated and integrated with other local authority plans and the Provinces plans.
Integration between local authorities and with other provincial government plans 
is necessary for an effective government response to a wide-scale disaster. Without 
integration and coordination, critical rescue and response efforts could be delayed and 
ineffective. Such a situation was apparent in the independent review by the Attorney 
General following the  blizzard on Vancouver Island and the Lower Mainland. The 
review found that there was no coordinated approach to clearing major transportation 
arteries. Some major roads were plowed up to the municipal border, but remained 
impassable beyond that.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 26 
One method to address integration and coordination across multiple local authorities 
is regional coordination. Our Offices  report on earthquake preparedness and 
the Attorney Generals report on the  blizzard both recommended that regional 
coordination be strengthened.
[Audit   Recommendation   The earthquake preparedness program should 
provide an integrated and cohesive approach to earthquake preparedness that 
supersedes the assignment of specific jurisdictional responsibilities.]
In April , the Ministry of Public Safety and the Solicitor General entered into a 
partnership with the Greater Vancouver Regional District (Metro Vancouver) to form 
the Integrated Partnership for Regional Emergency Management (IPREM). IPREMs 
objective is to improve regional emergency management in the Metro Vancouver 
region. This has been an important step in establishing the formal commitments and 
structures necessary to ensure that provincial and local authority plans are integrated 
and coordinated in Metro Vancouver. IPREM could become a model for cooperation 
between local governments elsewhere in the province. To date, this model has not been 
extended outside of Metro Vancouver.
We have been advised that IPREM is about to release its first product: the Regional 
Disaster Debris Management Plan; however, a number of deliverables still need to be 
completed for IPREM to achieve its vision of a disaster resilient region with a co-
ordinated emergency management strategy.
[Audit   Recommendation   The provincial government should strengthen 
regional emergency planning and coordination.]
4.2 Provincial ministries and Crown corporations plans are not reviewed by 
EMBC to ensure integration and coordination
Under the Emergency Program Management Regulation, ministers and Crown 
corporations are required to maintain emergency plans and procedures, and to ensure 
that these are coordinated and consistent with the emergency plans and procedures 
of every other minister. To help facilitate this coordination, the Emergency Program 
Management Regulation established the Inter-Agency Emergency Preparedness Council 
(IEPC), with representatives from each key ministry and co-chaired by EMBC. The 
regulation specifies that the IEPC must provide each minister with the assistance 
necessary to ensure that the ministers emergency plans and procedures are coordinated 
and consistent with the plans and procedures of all other ministers and with the 
governments overall emergency preparedness strategies.
Given this requirement, we expected either the IEPC, or EMBC, to be systemically 
reviewing ministry and Crown corporation plans periodically to ensure they are integrated 
and consistent with the plans and procedures of all other ministries and with the Provinces 
overall plans and strategies. This review would help ensure that ministry plans are integrated 
and coordinated. We found no such systematic reviews by either IEPC or EMBC.
[Audit   Recommendation   Deputy Minister and Crown corporations chief 
executives should take steps to increase the profile and effectiveness of the IEPC.]
RECOMMENDATION 5: We recommend that EMBC regularly review 
its earthquake program to identify significant gaps and risks to a coordinated and 
integrated response, and develop actions to address them.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 27 
5.  EMBC is not adequately monitoring stakeholder readiness 
and capacity
We expected EMBC to be monitoring the response readiness of all its major 
stakeholders and their capacity to carry out necessary activities in the event of a 
catastrophic earthquake.
Plans and procedures are effective only if everyone knows what to do, and there are 
enough people and resources to fully execute the plans.
Following a catastrophic earthquake, EMBC will need to coordinate the efforts of a 
vast number of different players including: local authorities (defined under the Act as 
being municipalities and their municipal councils; regional districts and their boards; 
and national park superintendants); provincial ministries and Crown corporations; the 
Temporary Emergency Assignment Management System (TEAMS) personnel; and 
the federal government. Key to EMBCs coordination will be a realistic understanding 
of these organizations readiness and capacity before such an event. The importance of 
this is reflected in one of the objectives in EMBCs Strategic Plan: monitor stakeholder 
readiness and capacity (See Exhibit ).
Overall, we found that EMBC is not adequately monitoring the readiness and capacity 
of its key stakeholders which include local authorities, provincial ministries, Crown 
corporations, TEAMS volunteers, First Nations, and the federal government.
5.1  Local authorities plans and capacity to carry out their plans are not 
adequately reviewed by EMBC
The Emergency Program Act and accompanying Local Authority Emergency 
Management Regulation set out the responsibility of local authorities to prepare a 
local emergency plan, provide details about the broad content of that plan, and make 
clear the expectation that the plan will be periodically reviewed and updated. EMBC 
has the authority under the Act and this regulation to review and evaluate: local 
emergency plans, local governments capacity to carry out this plan, and its training 
and exercise programs. We found that EMBC is not doing this. The lack of such review 
and evaluation exposes the province to the risk that provincial emergency plans 
may be founded on unrealistic assumptions of local government capacity and that, 
overall, the province may not have the resources it expects to be available to respond 
to and mitigate the effects of a catastrophic earthquake. As a result, residents of some 
communities could be put at increased risk following a catastrophic event.
[Audit   Recommendation   The provincial government should play a stronger 
role inmonitoring to ensure that all municipalities plan to a certain standard.]
5.2  Provincial ministries and Crown corporations plans and procedures and 
business continuity plans are not being adequately monitored
We found weaknesses in the monitoring of this stakeholder group in two main areas: 
plans and procedures and business continuity planning.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 28 
Plans and procedures 
Under the Emergency Program Management Regulation, each minister must develop 
emergency plans and procedures in the event of an emergency or disaster. As noted 
above, we expected that these plans and procedures would be integrated and coordinated. 
Furthermore, we expected that EMBC would be reviewing them to ensure that ministries 
and Crown corporations have achieved a required state of readiness and have the capacity 
necessary to implement their plans in a catastrophic earthquake.
Because EMBC is not conducting a systematic review of these plans, we concluded 
that there is a risk that ministrys and Crown corporations planned responses to 
a catastrophic earthquake may not be meeting a necessary standard, and that they 
may not have the capacity to carry out their plans. This concern was raised in BCs 
Legislature during discussions of BC Hydros December  internal audit report 
where legislators noted that: BC Hydro is not adequately prepared to react, respond, 
and recover from a widespread catastrophic event such as an earthquake.
[Audit   Recommendation   The provincial government should take 
a stronger, more proactive role than it is now doing to ensure that supporting 
ministries keep their earthquake preparedness plans current.]
Business continuity planning 
EMBCs All-Hazard Plan states that provincial ministries will mobilize to deliver 
emergency and critical services during emergencies and disasters. The ability of ministries 
to carry out their critical services is enhanced by the creation and maintenance of 
business continuity plans. Governments Core Policy and Procedures Manual places 
importance on ensuring ministries can carry out their services (see Exhibit ).
We expected EMBC to be monitoring and reporting on ministry business continuity 
plans, identifying deficiencies, and working with ministries to address any issues 
in a remediation plan. Instead, we found that EMBC only requires government 
corporations, that are considered critical, to prepare a self-assessment of their business 
continuity plans and does not verify the accuracy of statements in these documents. 
Furthermore, EMBC is not publicly reporting on the state of ministry business 
continuity plans.
Exhibit 12: Extract from the Core Policy and Procedures Manual
The Ministry of Finances Core Policy and Procedures Manual states that ministries 
shall: report the status of ministry-wide business continuity to EMBC semi-
annually and on an ad-hoc basis, as requested; conduct a risk assessment to 
identify and analyze threats to ministry business and services and submit them 
to EMBC; and complete a Business Impact Analysis for each business unit or 
program area utilizing EMBC templates.
Areas identified by ministries or EMBC as deficient or non-compliant will require 
the development of a remediation plan identifying the actions, target dates and 
individuals responsible. The progress of the plan will be monitored until the 
required actions are complete.
Source: Province of British Columbia, Ministry  of Finance
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 29 
[Audit  - Recommendation  The provincial government shouldassign 
responsibility for maintaining a business continuation planning program and 
establish accountability for success; monitor the status of such planning; and audit 
ministry planning programs.]
We also found significant gaps in EMBCs own business continuity plan. For example, 
although Kamloops has been identified as an alternative site for the Provincial Emergency 
Coordination Centre (PECC), in the event that its locations on Vancouver Island are 
affected, the transfer of the PECC responsibilities and staffing to the alternative site has 
not been tested. In addition, EMBC is not reviewing and updating its own business 
continuity plan annually, as required by the Core Policy and Procedures Manual.
[Audit  - Recommendation  The provincial government should take 
steps to identify, equip and test an alternate site for its Provincial Emergency 
Coordination Centre.]
5.3  Temporary Emergency Assignment Management System may not be 
sufficient to staff EMBCs response centres
Temporary Emergency Assignment Management System (TEAMS) is a staffing system 
that maintains a resource pool of highly skilled provincial employees from various 
ministries in BC, who train regularly and have the appropriate skills and experience 
to manage provincial emergency operations centres. These volunteers are a critical 
resource for EMBC to ensure it has the capacity to adequately staff its response centres. 
However, EMBC has noted a decline in the availability of trained experienced TEAMS 
members and has been challenged to find an adequate number of TEAMS personnel to 
deploy during emergencies.
5.4 The federal governments capacity creates challenges
During the audit, we identified three major challenges in the Provinces coordination 
and integration with the federal government:
. funding;
. logistics; and
. responsibility to First Nations.
Funding 
The Government of British Columbia and the Government of Canada signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on emergency preparedness in . The 
MOU includes a cost sharing agreement in support of a Joint Emergency Preparedness 
Program (JEPP) for developing and maintaining emergency plans. Under the JEPP 
program, local authorities were eligible to apply for federal funding to help enhance 
their emergency preparedness and response capacity. In March , the federal 
government eliminated JEPP funding. EMBC has noted that the loss of JEPP funding 
will likely impact the ability of local authorities to purchase equipment, and conduct 
training and exercises for emergency preparedness. Although the Ministry of Justice 
formally expressed its concern to the federal government about this cut, federal 
funding for the program has not been reinstated. As noted above, any loss of capacity 
and capability by local authorities could impact local governments and EMBCs 
response to a catastrophic earthquake.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 30 
Logistics 
In the aftermath of a catastrophic earthquake, it is expected that the provincial 
government will need to call on the federal government for assistance. One of the 
primary resources that the federal government can deploy is the Canadian Armed 
Forces. The Canadian Armed Forces brings expertise in logistics management and 
the movement of food, water and medical equipment. Significant readily available 
military resources exist in BC, but even these will likely be overwhelmed initially in a 
catastrophic earthquake. The Canadian Armed Forces have told EMBC that it could 
take several days before they could support the affected area. EMBC has not yet been 
able to mitigate this risk, especially in ensuring there is an effective flow of essential 
goods and supplies to affected communities.
Developing private partnerships for supply chain management could be one answer for 
overcoming this issue. EMBC has stated that development of these partnerships is a high 
priority, but none have been established to date. EMBC is working with the Red Cross 
to develop a plan for the timely and effective deployment of the Red Crosss national and 
international resources into BC following a catastrophic earthquake. Even after these 
planning details are finalized, current logistics challenges will still need to be addressed.
Responsibility to First Nations 
We also noted an inconsistency in the roles and responsibilities of the provincial and 
federal governments in terms of providing First Nations assistance in the event of a 
catastrophic earthquake. EMBCs  draft earthquake response plan identifies that 
assistance for First Nations will be federally provided by Indian and Northern Affairs 
Canada. However, a  letter of understanding between the provincial and federal 
governments states, When immediate action is required to preserve life or property on 
Indian Reserves and when local bands so request, the Provincial Emergency Program 
(now EMBC) will assist, support or arrange for such required emergency measures.
EMBC has advised our Office that it does not have the dedicated capacity to assist 
First Nations during a catastrophic earthquake. Further discussions with the federal 
government will be necessary to resolve this issue.
[Audit  - Recommendation  The provincial government should review 
on a regular basis the status of the National Earthquake Support Plan. As well, the 
Canada-BC Memorandum of Understanding on Emergency Preparedness should 
be reviewed and, where appropriate, updated.]
RECOMMENDATION 6: We recommend that EMBC regularly review 
and evaluate its stakeholders emergency plans and procedures to assess stakeholder 
readiness and capacity.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 31 
6.  Earthquake response training and exercising is inadequate
We expected EMBCs plans and procedures to include a robust training and disaster 
response exercise program. These activities are valuable in preparing emergency 
managers and stakeholders to respond successfully following a catastrophic earthquake.
Currently, EMBC provides emergency management training for volunteers and local 
governments through the Justice Institute of British Columbia. However, we found that this 
training does not specifically cover a catastrophic earthquake scenario and is dependent on 
discretionary funding which can affect its ability to be delivered consistently.
Although EMBC has carried out some disaster exercises, we found that these only 
tested a limited range of roles and responsibilities and did not include a scenario where 
a provincial state of emergency is declared. Also, it is unclear whether these exercises 
are working towards an overall objective to ensure EMBC could coordinate an 
integrated and effective response.
[Audit   Recommendation   The provincial government should provide 
more exercises at the province-wide and regional level to ensure that the liaison 
between emergency response efforts of different levels of government work 
effectively.]
RECOMMENDATION 7: We recommend that EMBC conduct regular 
catastrophic earthquake exercises with its stakeholders to ensure it can deliver an 
effective, comprehensive and integrated government-wide response to a catastrophic 
earthquake.
7.  EMBCs education program is not adequate to prepare the 
public for a catastrophic earthquake
We expected EMBCs plans and procedures to include an effective public education 
program. One of the goals of EMBCs Strategic Plan is increased safety and resilience 
for individuals and communities. An objective associated with this goal is delivering 
an effective public education program. Good practice dictates that public education is 
an important aspect of mitigating the impacts of a catastrophic event. For each person 
who is prepared and knowledgeable about what to do in an earthquake, there is one 
less person who may need basic assistance after the event. This means that limited 
government resources can then be stretched further.
We found that EMBC has only a limited public education program where one of its 
initiatives is assisting with an annual earthquake drill (ShakeOut) where participants 
Drop, Cover and Hold On. EMBC has also worked with some coastal communities 
on tsunami readiness. While EMBC does track information on the number of annual 
participants in the ShakeOut initiative, it does not track the effectiveness of its public 
education programs (i.e., whether families have emergency kits, reunification plans and 
the ability to sustain themselves for a period following a catastrophic earthquake as 
assumed in the Provinces  draft earthquake response plan).
A recent survey by the British Columbia Automobile Association indicated that while 
% of respondents noted that they would expect their home could be damaged by an 
earthquake, only % knew how to drop, cover and hold on if an earthquake were to 
hit. The survey raises concerns that EMBCs assumptions of the level of individual and 
family preparedness may be flawed.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 32 
RECOMMENDATION 8: We recommend that EMBC measure the 
effectiveness of its public preparedness initiatives at regular intervals.
EMBC is not reporting to the public and the 
Legislative Assembly about how prepared it is for 
a catastrophic earthquake
As we noted earlier, EMBCs plans and strategies are based on a model where preparing 
for and responding to a catastrophic earthquake require individuals, industry and not-
for-profit organizations and local, provincial and federal governments to work together 
to address the challenges faced by everyone in the affected area.
Embedded in this community response model are important assumptions of 
what roles, responsibilities, and level of preparedness exist before and after a 
catastrophic earthquake.
These assumptions must be realistic and all stakeholders must understand and 
agree to comply with them for this model to function effectively. Stakeholders have 
different levels of resources and risk acceptance, so it is essential that each stakeholder 
understand the actual level of preparedness achieved by all the others and what that 
means for him/her.
Provincial spending on catastrophic earthquake preparedness is ultimately a policy 
decision made by government, after it has weighed the competing needs and priorities 
of its constituents. As a result, it is essential that government is open about its state of 
catastrophic earthquake readiness if the public is to hold government accountable for 
its policy decisions.
Our  audit reached similar conclusions about the value of public reporting on the 
Provinces state of catastrophic earthquake preparedness, noting that the general public 
needs to appreciate the extent of their vulnerability if they are to be convinced to support 
public mitigation efforts and develop personal strategies for earthquake preparedness. 
The report went on to recommend that the Provincial Emergency Program (PEP) report 
annually on the state of earthquake preparedness. This recommendation was endorsed by 
the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts in its  report.
We therefore expected to find that EMBC is:
 tracking the publics actual level of catastrophic earthquake preparedness as part of 
the agencys evaluation of the effectiveness of its public education efforts; and
 reporting publicly its own level of preparedness as part of its efforts to be 
transparent and accountable to the public.
We found that neither EMBC, nor the ministry it operates within (Ministry of Justice), 
publicly reports on the state of catastrophic earthquake preparedness in the province.
The Ministry of Justice included performance indicators in its  Annual Service Plan 
that reflected a narrow aspect of the Provinces catastrophic earthquake preparedness  
Performance Measure : The percentage of critical Temporary Emergency Assignment 
Management System (TEAMS) positions filled by qualified government employees. 
This measure was subsequently dropped from the planned performance measure listing 
for the // Service Plan under the rationale that it was not an outcome-
based measure. The current service plan includes the performance measure Timeliness 
of Disaster Financial Assistance private sector claim adjudication.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
DETAILED REPORT 33 
In our view, neither of these indicators provide key stakeholders or the public with 
sufficient information to understand fully how well prepared the province is for a 
catastrophic earthquake, the risks that they are facing, or the level of preparedness that 
they must achieve to protect themselves, their families and their communities.
Governments preparedness includes an understanding of how well all ministries are 
prepared to respond to a catastrophic earthquake. The Emergency Program Management 
Regulation specifically sets out that the Inter-Agency Emergency Preparedness Council 
(IEPC) facilitates the coordination of ministry plans and procedures. This role is critical 
to support EMBCs mandate. With such an important role in ensuring that emergency 
preparedness is coordinated and integrated across ministries, it was recommended in our 
 audit that the IEPC report annually on its plans and achievements. However, this 
recommendation has never been implemented.
[Audit   Recommendation   The provincial government should report 
annually on the state of earthquake preparedness in British Columbia. The report 
should include an assessment of the overall state of earthquake preparedness, a 
report on plans and achievements of the Inter-Agency Emergency Preparedness 
Council, and accountability information regarding Provincial Emergency 
Program`s own performance in relation to its annual objectives.]
RECOMMENDATION 9: We recommend that EMBC report annually 
to British Columbians on the state of its catastrophic earthquake preparedness. The 
report should include an assessment of the overall state of earthquake preparedness, 
risks and capacity, and describe the plans and achievements of the Inter-Agency 
Emergency Preparedness Council (IEPC).
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
LOOKING AHEAD
 34 
A    looked at one of the four pillars (preparedness) 
of emergency management, future work by our Office may include the other three 
pillars: mitigation and prevention, response and recovery. All four pillars are critical 
to ensuring the Province can manage the effects of a catastrophic earthquake. For 
example, while planning for a response is challenging, it is finite. Post disaster recovery 
often takes years, even decades. Appropriate recovery planning can improve resiliency 
by reducing recovery time and economic losses.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
APPENDIX A: TYPES OF EARTHQUAKES IN THE 
CASCADIA SUBDUCTION ZONE 35 
Exhibit A1: Types of earthquakes in the Cascadia subduction zone
Affected Max. 
Source Area Size Recurrence
Subduction W.WA, M - yr
ZoneOR, CA
Deep Juan de W.WA, M +- yr
Fuca plateOR
Crustal faults WA, OR, M +Hundreds 
CAof yrs
Source: United States Geological Survey
In BC, a mega-thrust earthquake (the Deep-focus earthquakes occur on faults Shallow-focus earthquakes occur within 
big one) could occur offshore when one at depths of -kilometres in this region.the earths crust along fractures, generally 
piece of the earths crust (oceanic plate) at depths less than  kilometres. This class 
is pushing beneath another (continental Because the faults break so deeply, the affects a smaller area than a deep earthquake 
plate). Stress builds and eventually wave energy spreads over a much larger of the same magnitude, but the shaking is 
the two pieces slip rapidly, generating area than from a shallow-focus quake. usually more intense and aftershocks more 
earthquakes as large as magnitude .Strong shaking generally lasts a few numerous. Tsunamis are unlikely, but could 
seconds to a minute, but can be longer. occur if a shallow earthquake occurred 
Quickly following an earthquake like Few if any aftershocks occur.under the Strait of Georgia.
this in British Columbia, a destructive 
tsunami  a series of waves up to  After a deep earthquake in this region, the Because of the abundance of shallow 
metres high  will hit the coast while heaviest damage will be likely concentrated faults in this region, small earthquakes 
also travelling across the Pacific Ocean on Vancouver Island and along the Strait of of this type are recorded every day, 
toward Alaska, Hawaii and Asia. There Georgia. No tsunami is expected.and damaging quakes occur every few 
would be widespread damage, including These earthquakes strike, on average, decades. The probability of a shallow 
thousands of injuries and fatalities and every  years, with the latest in , crustal earthquake causing considerable 
the destruction of hundreds of buildings.  and . The probability of a deep damage in British Columbia has been 
Aftershocks up to magnitude  could earthquake causing considerable damage estimated at approximately % in the 
occur, causing even greater damage.of a magnitude . or greater is around next  years. To better understand these 
This type of quake occurs, on average, % in the next  years.quakes, more information is needed about 
where the active faults are.
every  to  years, but the intervals Notable deep-focus earthquakes: 
between events have been as short as Haida Gwaii, , M .; Nisqually, Notable shallow-focus earthquakes: 
short as  to  years. The last major Washington, , M .Vancouver Island, , M .
mega thrust quake occurred in  
and was approximately a magnitude. 
Scientists have estimated that there 
is about a % chance of a similar 
magnitude quake in the next  years.
Notable mega-thrust earthquakes: Alaska, 
, M .; Indonesia, , M .-.; 
Chile, , M .; Japan, , M .Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
APPENDIX B: EARTHQUAKE STATISTICS
 36 
Exhibit B1: Earthquake statistics
Effects Earthquakes Energy Equivalents Energy Release
1015,000,000,000,000
Chile (1960)
Largest recorded earthquakes Alaska (1964)
9 Destruction over vast area Sumatra (2004)<1476,000,000,000
Massive loss of lifeJapan (2011)
Chile (2010) Krakatoa Eruption
Great earthquake
8Severe economic impact San Fransico, CA (1906) Worlds Largest Nuclear Test (USSR)
115,000,000,000
Large loss of life New Madrid, MO (1812)Mount St. Helens Eruption
Charleston, SC (1886)
Major earthquake
7Haiti (2010)
Damage ($ billions) 18476,000,000
Loss of life
Northridge (1994)
Hiroshima Atomic Bomb
6 Strong earthquake 12015,000,000
Property damage
Long Island, NY (1884)
Magnitude
5Moderate earthquake1,500476,000
Some property damageAverage Tornado
4Light earthquake10,000(equivalent kilograms of TNT)15,000
Noticeable shaking
Large Lightning Bolt
3Minor earthquake often felt100,000Oklahoma City Bombing476
Moderate Lightning Bolt
2Generally not felt1,000,00015
Number of Earthquakes per year (worldwide)
Source: Adapted from Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
The left side of the figure above describes the effects of an earthquake by magnitude. 
The larger the number, the bigger the earthquake. Significant earthquakes are noted 
on the left side of the shaded tower. The shaded area indicates how many earthquakes 
of each magnitude occur every year. The events on the right side of the tower show 
equivalent energy release.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
APPENDIX C: SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS - 
OAGS 1997 REPORT 37 
Summary of recommendations
Recommendation # Recommendation Description 
*The provincial government should establish a Seismic Safety Commission. 
* The provincial government should develop long-term goals for earthquake preparedness.
* The provincial government should provide more focus to its earthquake preparedness program. 
* The provincial Emergency Program (PEP), regional, and local governments should extend the development 
of earthquake planning scenarios. 
*The provincial government should reposition the Provincial Emergency Program.
 *The provincial government should increase funding for the Provincial Emergency Program. 
* The provincial Emergency Program should report annually on the state of earthquake preparedness in 
British Columbia. 
* The provincial government should raise the profile of the Inter-Agency Emergency Preparedness Council (IEPC). 
 The provincial government should strengthen regional emergency planning and coordination. 
* The provincial government should ensure that the seismic elements of the Provincial Building Code are 
applied to all provincial buildings. 
*The provincial government should maintain an advisory capability to help municipalities work with the 
Provincial Building Code.
The provincial government should determine the role that insurance should play in mitigation, and define 
the most appropriate regime through which it can be offered to the public.
The provincial government should continue discussions with the insurance industry and, where 
appropriate, the federal government, with a view to reaching agreement on how best to create an 
environment for an affordable insurance regime within the industrys capacity.
*Provincial Emergency Program (PEP) should measure the extent of public preparedness. (This should be 
done now, to help decide how and where to focus public awareness activities and to provide a baseline for 
future measurement and, at regular intervals in the future, to help assess the effectiveness of the initiatives.) 
* PEP should work with key stakeholders (such as Emergency Preparedness Canada, provincial government 
agencies, local governments, utilities and private sector organizations) to develop and implement a 
coordinated public awareness communication strategy.
* This OAG audit recommendation was endorsed in the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts  Earthquake Preparedness in British Columbia report.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
APPENDIX C: SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS - 
OAGS 1997 REPORT 38 
Recommendation # Recommendation Description 
*PEP should, in conjunction with the development of earthquake planning scenarios (see Recommendation 
), develop an inventory of key provincial infrastructure. Based on the detailed vulnerability analysis the 
planning scenarios would provide, options for dealing with areas of vulnerability should be considered, the 
cost of upgrading estimated, and programs proposed to carry out the upgrades on a priority basis over, for 
example, the next  years. 
*The Ministry of Health and PEP should give immediate attention to reviewing and, where appropriate, 
strengthening the ability of the health system to respond to a major earthquake. 
*All ministries assigned key support functions should complete, without delay, plans detailing how they will 
carry out their assigned responsibilities after a major earthquake. 
*The Ministry of Environment, Lands and Parks should develop a response plan, test it and train staff 
accordingly, in order to be able to meet its responsibilities under the provincial earthquake response plan. 
*PEP should update the British Columbia Earthquake Plan to reflect the current situation, and take steps to 
have the Emergency Program Management Regulation amended as necessary. 
*PEP should develop a new communication strategy to ensure that the provincial response plan is known 
and understood by local authorities and response agencies. 
*PEP should take a stronger, more proactive role than it is now doing, to ensure that supporting ministries 
keep their earthquake preparedness plans current. 
*PEP should continue to work with Emergency Preparedness Canada at the national level to develop further 
heavy urban search and rescue capability. 
*PEP should take a leadership role with respect to the development of systems standards, protocols, 
guidelines and coordination for resource management. 
*PEP should identify a number of potential Provincial Field Response Centre sites at strategic locations 
throughout the province, test them for suitability, and communicate the details to those agencies likely to 
be involved in the response efforts. 
*PEP should take steps to identify, equip and test an alternative site for its Provincial Emergency Coordination Centre. 
*PEP should play a stronger role in providing to local governments advice and assistance regarding response 
planning, and in monitoring to ensure that all municipalities plan to a certain standard. 
*PEP should review on a regular basis with Emergency Preparedness Canada the status of the National 
Earthquake Support Plan. As well, the Canada-British Columbia Memorandum of Understanding on Emergency 
Preparedness should be reviewed and, where appropriate, updated.
*PEP should continue to work with its counterparts in Alberta to ensure that the Alberta Support Plan is 
operational for a real event. 
*PEP should remain in contact with the Canadian Armed Forces to ensure that it has current information 
about the resources and capabilities available, and disseminate this information to municipalities. 
*PEP should discuss with Emergency Preparedness Canada the possibility of conducting regular exercises 
around the National Earthquake Support Plan and its relationship to British Columbias plans. 
* This OAG audit recommendation was endorsed in the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts  Earthquake Preparedness in British Columbia report.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
APPENDIX C: SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS - 
OAGS 1997 REPORT 39 
Recommendation # Recommendation Description 
*PEP should develop provincial initiatives to encourage municipalities to test key components of their 
individual plans sufficiently, and to provide more exercises at the province-wide and regional levels to ensure 
that the liaison between the emergency response efforts of different levels of government works effectively. 
*PEP should prepare a matrix of emergency planning and response positions at both provincial and local 
government levels, and identify the appropriate training regime needed for each position. 
*PEP should obtain from provincial and local government agencies, at least annually, information about the 
training they have provided to emergency planning and response personnel. 
*PEP should develop a clear and practical plan setting out roles, responsibilities and processes for carrying 
out initial damage assessment immediately following a major earthquake, and communicate the plan to all 
who will have a role in damage assessment. 
*PEP should develop a coordinated plan for upgrading the Provinces communication equipment to a more 
reliable system, and update, finalize and distribute its communications plan. 
*PEP should develop and issue a current emergency public information plan as soon as possible, and test the 
plan on a regular basis. 
*The provincial government should implement the recommendations made by the Risk Management 
Branch regarding business continuation planning. These recommendations include: assigning responsibility 
for maintaining a business continuation planning program and establishing accountability for success; 
monitoring the status of such planning; and auditing ministry planning programs. Also recommended was 
that the Risk Management Branch act in a training and coordinating role and provide status reports to the 
Deputy Ministers Council.
The provincial government should give serious consideration to how best to coordinate the roles of the Risk 
Management Branch and PEP, as this area of emergency preparedness is closely related to the other aspects 
of preparedness for which PEP is responsible.
*The provincial government should discuss with the federal government options for dealing with the 
financial ramifications of a catastrophic disaster. In addition, it should develop its own options paper on 
ways of dealing with and mitigating its own financial liabilities in the event of a major earthquake. 
*Ministries and Crown corporations should give immediate attention to completing business continuation plans. 
*PEP should establish and provide to local governments guidelines for the development of business 
continuation plans. 
*PEP should pursue the recommendations made in an interim report of the Joint Emergency Liaison 
Committee regarding structural assessment. These recommendations include: assigning volunteer 
engineers to pre-designated fire halls; providing accessible storage of necessary equipment and supplies 
at pre-designated fire halls; identifying volunteer engineers and registering them with PEP; having PEP 
coordinate the registration of all types of volunteers prior to a disaster; and having PEP develop an 
education strategy for professionals and the public to inform them about building inspection and posting. 
*PEP should advise local governments as to the steps they should take to develop sound plans to inspect 
and post buildings after an earthquake (helpful in this regard particularly in establishing priorities for 
post-earthquake inspections will be the inventories of hazardous buildings and critical response facilities 
suggested in Recommendations  and .) 
* This OAG audit recommendation was endorsed in the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts  Earthquake Preparedness in British Columbia report.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
APPENDIX C: SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS - 
OAGS 1997 REPORT 40 
Recommendation # Recommendation Description 
*PEP should, working in conjunction with local governments, ensure that plans are developed to inspect all 
key infrastructures (whether it is owned provincially or locally). 
* PEP should establish and provide to local governments guidelines for dealing with debris removal. 
* PEP should establish and provide to local governments guidelines for planning for reconstruction.
Local governments should take steps to apply the seismic elements of the building code to all new critical 
response facilities. 
*Local governments should, in conjunction with the development of earthquake planning scenarios (see 
Recommendation ), develop an inventory of key infrastructure. Based on the detailed vulnerability 
analysis the planning scenarios would provide, options for dealing with areas of vulnerability should be 
considered, the cost of upgrading estimated, and programs proposed to carry out the upgrades on a priority 
basis over, for example, the next  years. 
*Local governments should develop programs to identify and inventory hazardous buildings and to upgrade 
the seismic robustness of buildings based on the relative magnitude of risk to the public. 
*Local governments should assess all critical response facilities, estimate the cost of upgrading them to a standard 
that would ensure their operability in a post-earthquake situation, and establish priorities for upgrading. 
*Local governments should ensure they have current, complete earthquake preparedness plans, prepared in 
accordance with guidelines issued by PEP. 
*Local governments should develop schedules for testing their plans and ensuring that recommendations 
arising from the tests are dealt with. 
*Local governments should develop plans for carrying out initial damage assessment immediately following 
a major earthquake, and ensure the plans are consistent with the provincial plan. 
*Local governments should continue to test their ability to communicate with each other and, where 
significant problems are identified, take steps to correct the problems. 
*Local governments should develop emergency public information plans, and test them on a regular basis. 
*Local governments should give immediate attention to completing business continuation plans. 
*Local governments should, working in conjunction with PEP, ensure that plans are developed to inspect all 
key infrastructures (whether it is owned provincially or locally). 
*Local governments should develop plans for debris removal. 
*Local governments should establish strategies for long-term reconstruction. 
* This OAG audit recommendation was endorsed in the Select Standing Committee on Public Accounts  Earthquake Preparedness in British Columbia report.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
APPENDIX D: SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS -  
SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
1999 REPORT 41 
The following recommendations were made by the Select Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts  in addition to the recommendations that they endorsed which can be 
found in Appendix C.
Summary of recommendations
Recommendation #Recommendation Description
.Your committee recommends that the PEP, in developing a coordinated public awareness communication 
strategy, take advantage of marketing expertise and work closely with local governments, neighbourhood 
programs and non-profit agencies.
.Your committee recommends the provincial government encourage the incorporation of earthquake 
preparedness issues and emergency first aid certificate programs into school curricula throughout British 
Columbia.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government work with local governments to ensure that 
micro zonation mapping is completed in high-hazard areas of British Columbia.
.Your committee recommends that the Provincial Emergency Program finalize its B.C. Earthquake Strategy 
by March , , and provide public access to the strategy by making it available on the Internet.
.Your committee encourages the provincial government to consider repositioning the PEP within the 
Premiers Office in order to raise its profile and increase its effectiveness.
.Your committee recommends that the annual report by PEP include, but not be limited to a discussion of the 
following topics: the progress of earthquake planning and preparedness in provincial ministries and Crown 
corporations; federal-provincial coordination of earthquake planning and preparedness measures; the work and 
progress of Treasury Board (Capital Division) with respect to seismic upgrading of provincial infrastructure.
.Your committee recommends that the IEPC work with non-government emergency response organizations 
to achieve better coordination of response efforts.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government, in consultation with the general insurance 
industry and other stakeholders, determine the type of regime that would best ensure affordable earthquake 
insurance continues to be available, to compensate British Columbia policyholders who suffer earthquake 
related loss to their property and/or its contents, and encourage the adoption by those policyholders.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government, in consultation with the general insurance 
industry and other stakeholders, clarify the issues with respect to scope of insurance coverage for damages 
resulting from earthquakes, and in particular with respect to fire damage following earthquake.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government require insurers to take appropriate steps 
to draw to policyholders attention, on the face of insurance policies, the scope of coverage available with 
respect to damages resulting from earthquake.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
APPENDIX D: SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS -  
SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
1999 REPORT 42 
Recommendation #Recommendation Description
.Your committee recognizes the work of Treasury Board (Capital Division) in evaluating, costing and 
prioritizing seismic upgrading of British Columbias infrastructure. Your committee encourages the 
provincial government to make the seismic upgrading of provincial infrastructure a priority in British 
Columbia and, in doing so, to recognize its moral and legal responsibility for the safety of the provinces 
school children.
.Your committee recommends that seismic upgrading projects in schools include a consideration of non-
structural damage mitigation measures, such as seismic restraint systems.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government ensure that all buildings that are designated as 
emergency centres meet current seismic standards.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government encourage and promote tie-down programs for 
gas appliances and mobile homes, and examine the feasibility of mandating tie-downs in the applicable codes.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government encourage and promote public education 
with respect to earthquake-related natural gas hazards.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government encourage earthquake response planning and 
testing in all British Columbia schools, and consider providing funding assistance for emergency supplies in 
all schools.
.Your committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry of Health to review and strengthen the ability of the 
health system to respond to a major earthquake, and encourages the ministry to continue its efforts in this 
regard and in particular, to consider the adequacy of British Columbias ambulance services capacity.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government encourage local government initiatives, as 
well as cooperation between industry and governments, with respect to hazardous material planning.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial and local government take steps to ensure adequate 
consideration is given to womens services in earthquake response planning.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government recognize the important role neighbourhood 
programs have to play in earthquake preparedness planning and response, and take steps to promote the 
development of more such programs in British Columbia.
.Your committee encourages the PEP to complete its upgrading and updating efforts as soon as possible, and 
to ensure these plans are updated on a regular basis. Your committee also encourages local governments to 
implement the Auditor Generals recommendations with respect to emergency communications and public 
information plans.
.Your committee acknowledges the Provincial Emergency Programs efforts in coordinating the 
Thunderbird   Cascadia Response exercise in March , and recommends that the provincial 
government encourage more joint earthquake response exercises by the Provincial Emergency Program, 
Emergency Preparedness Canada and the Canadian Armed Forces, including regular exercises around the 
National Earthquake Support Plan and its relationship to British Columbias plans.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
APPENDIX D: SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS -  
SELECT STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS 
1999 REPORT 43 
Recommendation #Recommendation Description
.Your committee recommends that future testing of earthquake response plans involve participation by 
urban search and rescue teams.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government review relevant legislation and policies 
to ensure that there are no legislative, regulatory or other impediments to the provision of adequate 
emergency training and certification to enable emergency medical assistants to provide effective assistance 
in the event of a major earthquake.
.Your committee recommends PEP work cooperatively with local governments to develop guidelines for 
local government business continuation plans.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government educate British Columbians about the fact 
that public funds will generally not be available to compensate for losses to private property resulting from 
earthquake, and that public funds will only be available to restore and replace public infrastructure.
.Your committee recommends that the provincial government, in particular the Provincial Emergency 
Program, move with dispatch in developing strategies to address the recommendations contained in this 
report.
.Your committee recommends that representatives of the Provincial Emergency Program re-attend before 
the committee no later than December , , in order to provide information regarding progress made 
in implementing the recommendations contained in this report.
Auditor General of British Columbia | March 2014 
Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness
Location: 
 Bastion Square 
Victoria, British Columbia 
VV X
Office Hours: 
Monday to Friday 
: am  : pm
Telephone: -- 
Toll free through Enquiry BC at: --- 
In Vancouver dial --
Fax: --
Email: bcauditor@bcauditor.com
Website : 
This report and others are available at our website, which also contains further information about the 
office: www.bcauditor.com
Reproducing: 
Information presented here is the intellectual property of the Auditor General of British Columbia and is 
copyright protected in right of the Crown. We invite readers to reproduce any material, asking only that 
they credit our Office with authorship when any information, results or recommendations are used.
 
Emergency Management BC 
Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017  
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
 
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT BC VISION  
Emergency Management British Columbia will be the premier 
organization in Canada for the management of emergencies and 
disasters at the provincial level. Our leadership will solidify a 
cooperative and effective approach to emergency management in 
British Columbia. As a result, the province will be resilient, 
adaptive and confident in its abilities when challenged by known 
and emergent threats to public safety. 
 
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT BC MISSION  
Emergency Management British Columbia is responsible to British 
Columbians for leading the management of provincial level 
emergencies and disasters and supporting other authorities within 
their areas of jurisdiction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Emergency Management BC 
 Regions and Regional Office  
locations. 
2 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
Introduction 
 
The number and severity of emergencies and disasters that challenge individuals, communities and 
all levels of government are increasing due to the diversity of natural and human caused hazards, 
climate change and the ongoing 
expansion of the urban 
environment. These disasters can 
pose significant risks to the 
continued delivery of programs and 
services to the public. Emergency 
management requires coordinated 
prevention and mitigation, 
preparedness, response and 
recovery efforts to: minimize loss of 
life and suffering; protect health, 
property, infrastructure and the 
environment; limit economic loss; 
and reduce the potential social 
impacts of all hazards.  
 
Emergency Management BC (EMBC) 
was formed to be the lead 
coordinating agency in the provincial 
government for all emergency management activities. EMBC provides executive coordination, 
strategic planning, and multi-agency facilitation and strives to develop effective working 
relationships in an increasingly complex emergency management environment.   
 
EMBC works with local governments, First Nations, federal departments, industry, non-government 
organizations and volunteers to support the emergency management phases of mitigation/ 
prevention, preparedness, response and recovery.  Additionally, EMBC engages provincial, national 
and international partners to enhance collective emergency preparedness.  
 
EMBC provides leadership through a number of programs, including the following: 
 
x Emergency Management  
x Office of the Fire Commissioner  
x British Columbia Coroners Service   
 
Due to the specific nature of the Office of the Fire Commissioner (OFC) and the British Columbia 
Coroners Service (BCCS), the OFC and BCCS are developing separate strategic plans that align with 
the vision and mission of EMBC.  
  
3 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
 
EMBC Organizational Chart 
 
4 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
In addition to the specific activities outlined in this strategic plan, EMBC staff deliver beneficial 
public safety services such as 24/7 availability through the Emergency Coordination Centre, Social 
Media Outreach, Flood Protection Program and the Disaster Financial Assistance Program. 
 
The purpose of this document is to focus EMBC deliverables over the next three years.  
Engagement of the plan will be done through communications to both staff internally and also 
external stakeholders.  Key work activities and their deliverables will be monitored through the use 
of an activity tracking dashboard.  The plan will be updated annually to include a status update on 
key deliverables. 
 
Goals and Lines of Effort 
In formulating its strategic plan, EMBC sought alignment with the Ministrys justice reform goals 
and has developed five key goals that reflect its unique role in supporting safety and resiliency for 
British Columbias communities. 
The 2014/15  2016/17 Emergency Management BC Strategic Plan reflects our ongoing commitment to 
five key goals:  
 
 
1. EMBC is a learning organization with a culture of continuous improvement. 
 
 2. EMBC is expert in leading the management of catastrophic disasters of provincial 
 significance and impact. 
 3. EMBC is effective in supporting other responsible authorities in their mandate to 
 mitigate and manage emergencies and disasters. 
 
 4. EMBC excels in the provision of the Office of the Fire Commissioners and British 
 Columbia Coroners Services unique services. 
 5. EMBC empowers and strengthens volunteer organizations.  
 
 
In support of the five key goals, EMBC will prioritize 
its work activities for the next three years under six 
strategic lines of effort: 
 
1. Organizational Capacity 
2. Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness 
3. Training and Exercises  
4. Partnerships 
5. Public Education 
6. Business Practices and Governance 
 
5 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
 
Challenges  
To match capacity to mandate - It will be a challenge to solidify our mandate, identify and fill critical 
capability gaps, and to discipline our approach to business such that we are focused yet flexible, 
and achieve progress in priority activities. 
To achieve unity of effort - A critical requirement for EMBC is to coordinate efforts across all levels 
of government and with partner organizations. A challenge will be to build positive momentum 
amongst varied partners with their own capacity challenges, towards a cooperative and effective 
model in British Columbia. 
To sustain a visionary perspective - As a learning organization with many competing demands, we 
will be challenged to anticipate and remain alert to emergent threats and opportunities. We must 
build on a solid strategic plan and be adaptive as we progress. 
6 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
Strategic lines of effort and supporting activities 
Line of Effort 1: Organizational Capacity 
For EMBC to meet its vision, the capacity of the organization has to be re-directed towards the 
goals.  
 
Develop capacity in key strategic areas 
In order to support a culture of effectiveness and continuous improvement EMBC will aim to build 
organizational capacity in the following areas: 
x Logistics management 
x Operational level planning 
x Internal and external surge capacity  
x Training and exercising 
Deliverables  
2014/15: Develop a new staffing plan that re-aligns staff priorities to meet EMBCs current priorities.  
 
Provincial coordination capacity 
The provincial governments ability to respond 
to a disaster or emergency would be 
significantly improved by having a framework 
for cross-government and partner agencies to 
attend an area that is being affected by a 
disaster or emergency.  This framework would 
allow representation at a local level by relevant 
provincial ministry representatives and relevant 
partner organizations. 
Deliverables 
2014/15: Analyze and report on the feasibility of establishing provincial coordination capacity 
including EMBC staff and subject matter experts from responsible ministries and partner 
organizations. 
 
2015/16: If analysis demonstrates that the concept is feasible, establish the framework and 
resources for provincial coordination capacity with partner organizations. 
7 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
Line of Effort 2: Catastrophic Earthquake Preparedness 
In response to the 2014 Office of the Auditor General report, EMBC will focus on improving 
catastrophic earthquake preparedness. 
Multi-year roadmap aimed at the enhancement of earthquake preparedness in BC.  
EMBC has made a commitment to British Columbians to develop a long-term plan that articulates 
provincial goals regarding catastrophic earthquake preparedness, and a phased approach for 
achieving these goals. 
Deliverables  
2014/15: Develop a roadmap that outlines the deliverables required for EMBC to achieve the 
earthquake immediate response plan. 
 
2015/16: Extend the roadmap beyond March 31, 2015. 
 
 
Earthquake plans 
EMBC is responsible for leading the management of catastrophic disasters of provincial significance 
and impact; as such, EMBC will enhance the current BC Earthquake Plan to ensure immediate and 
sustained earthquake response activities are clearly articulated.  
Deliverables  
2014/15: Development of immediate response plan. 
 
2015/16: Development of sustained response plan. 
 
2016/17: Facilitate Inter-Agency Emergency 
Preparedness Council recovery planning. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
8 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
Consultation with stakeholders on the subject of earthquake preparedness 
An extensive consultation with British Columbia stakeholders 
regarding issues, priorities, and opportunities in the area of 
catastrophic earthquake preparedness is to take place. It will engage 
all levels of government as well as the media, business, local 
authorities, First Nations, academia, adjoining provincial, federal and 
state jurisdictions and non-governmental organizations. 
Consultation activities will focus on those regions at highest risk from 
seismic events.  
 
Deliverables  
2014/15: These consultations will culminate in a report to government by December 31, 2014 with 
the findings being considered in the development of the earthquake plan. 
 
 
Business continuity 
EMBCs ability to recover the Provincial Emergency Coordination Centre (PECC) and Emergency 
Coordination Centre (ECC) is critical to its ability to lead the management of a catastrophic disaster 
of provincial significance and impact. 
EMBC coordinates with ministry representatives to produce and analyze work such as mission 
critical lists. This cross government coordination is vital during catastrophic events. 
Deliverables  
2014/15: Update the Cross 
Government Mission Critical List. 
 
2014/15: Complete draft Government 
Services Branch plan. 
 
2015/16: Implement approved 
Government Services Branch Plan. 
  
9 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
Enhance Provincial Emergency Notification System  
The Provincial Emergency Notification System (PENS) is used 
to alert local government officials and the media of tsunami 
watch, advisory and warnings. The current notification 
system is not able to deliver notifications as quickly as 
required. EMBC is undertaking a project to enhance the 
existing system.   
Key outcomes for this project include:  
x Decreasing the time to issue alerts, 
x Ensuring the right people are notified, and 
x Ensuring the alerting process is reliable. 
 
Deliverables  
2014/15: Enhance PENS with an improved alerting system that will reduce the time required to 
provide tsunami notifications to emergency management stakeholders. 
2015/16: Explore the use of PENS and emergent technologies for additional warnings beyond 
tsunami notification.  
Enhance the communication ability of senior officials  
Existing communications mechanisms such as telephone 
or internet based communications offer sufficient 
capabilities during normal situations but can become 
unreliable during disasters. In order for senior officials 
to continue to operate in such situations, alternate 
communications channels are required. EMBC is 
undertaking a project to ensure that such alternatives 
are in place.  
The key outcome is the ability to maintain 
communications when telephone and internet are not 
available. 
Deliverables  
2014/15: Pilot project to deliver alternate communications and procedures for the use of satellite 
telephones by senior officials. 
10 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
 
Integrated Information Systems 
This initiative will undertake a series of projects 
to enhance EMBCs information systems and 
technology to ultimately improve efficiency and 
effectiveness. The activities within this initiative 
will be guided by an overall desire to deliver 
better integration between systems.  
 
 
Deliverables  
2014/17: Contingent to additional funding becoming available, the following projects will be 
considered: 
x Emergency Call Centre Transformation and Integration - Replace existing telephone call 
centre technology with a virtual call centre that will allow staff to move between physical 
locations in the event of an emergency and will provide enhanced call management and 
integration with other systems. 
x Emergency Management Website Integration  Create 
an integrated easy to use website to help citizens and 
partners quickly find information and to support 
enhanced engagement and collaboration.  
x Emergency Management Information System (EMIS) 
Integrate EMIS with other EMBC systems to enable 
incident information to be shared automatically. 
x Integrated Contact Information  Create a single shared 
repository for contact information that will be used 
across EMBCs existing systems to ensure that up-to-
date contact information is available from within any system.       
 
 
 
 
11 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
Critical infrastructure program 
The restoration of critical 
infrastructure is essential 
for British Columbians to 
recover after a 
catastrophic event. 
Elements of the critical 
infrastructure program 
include working with 
critical infrastructure 
owners, identifying a 
provincial list of critical 
assets and establishing 
mitigation strategies that 
will prevent or reduce the 
consequence of loss.  
Deliverables  
2014/15: Develop a critical infrastructure assessment tool in partnership with Defence and Research 
Development Canada. 
2015/17: Develop a list of provincial critical infrastructure assets. 
2016/17: Develop a critical infrastructure operational plan for British Columbia. 
  
12 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
 
Line of Effort 3: Training and Exercising 
Training and exercises are cornerstone emergency management activities and are critical for a 
successful response.  Training and exercising supports, tests and validates the effective integration 
of the response activities of all levels of government and other emergency management partners 
such as critical infrastructure owners and operators, not-for-profit agencies and volunteers.  
 
Training 
The training program provides the 
necessary support to all EMBC staff, the 
Temporary Emergency Assignment 
Management System (TEAMS), Public 
Safety Lifeline Volunteers (PSLV), and 
senior officials to ensure comprehensive 
understanding and associated 
competencies to fulfill legislated 
obligations and roles during emergencies 
and disasters.  
Deliverables  
Internal Training 
2014/17: Develop and deliver operational training for the PECC and PREOCs in response to all 
hazards, including catastrophic earthquakes. 
2014/17: Develop and deliver training to senior provincial government officials to orientate them to 
their respective roles and responsibilities during emergencies and disasters. 
External Training 
2014/17: Deliver Search and Rescue, Emergency Management and Emergency Social Services 
training to local authorities and PSLV.  
2014/15: Deliver elected officials workshops for civic and municipal leaders to provide an 
understanding of their respective roles and responsibilities as well as the emergency management 
framework in BC.  
 
 
13 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
 
Exercises  
The objective of exercises is to validate plans, to test procedures, to provide realistic training for 
staff as well as to test facilities, equipment and resources. Exercises also foster relationships, 
confirm expectations and maintain rapport with key partners. 
Deliverables  
Internal Exercises 
2014/17: Using a combination of drills, 
orientations, tabletop and functional 
exercises, incrementally test the new 
PECC and PREOC operational guidelines 
for all hazards, including a catastrophic 
earthquake. 
 
2014/15: Develop the methodology to 
test the roles and responsibilities of 
senior officials. 
External Exercises 
2014/15: Exercise integrating plans and procedures with stakeholders via the Integrated Exercise 
Working Group (IEWG). 
 
2014/15: Exercise the activation of the Emergency Response Unit of the Canadian Red Cross 
Auxiliary to Government Agreement under a catastrophic earthquake scenario. 
 
2015/16: Validate the immediate response framework of the BC Earthquake Plan through a tabletop 
exercise with external agencies. 
 
2016/17: Participate in Washington State Exercise to use the Pacific Northwest Emergency 
Management Agreement (PNEMA), and hold a concurrent exercise with national stakeholders and 
exercise the Emergency Management Mutual Aid Arrangement (EMMA). 
 
 
  
14 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
Line of Effort 4: Partnerships  
Effective partnerships with stakeholders are crucial for successful emergency management. The 
following work activities are aimed at enhancing current partnerships and developing new 
relationships with stakeholder groups.  
 
EMBC support to local government emergency management programs 
A number of tools and services are provided to local 
government by EMBC through our website and staff 
located throughout British Columbia. Over the course 
of the next three years, EMBC intends to better 
engage local government through a variety of 
communication methods, to modernize the tools that 
are available, and to promote a better understanding 
of EMBC policies, roles and responsibilities.  
Deliverables  
2014/15: Based on research and a gap analysis, develop a strategy to engage, inform and support 
local government emergency management programs.  
2015/17: Complete the deliverables outlined in the strategy. Establish a review process for EMBC 
support to local government. 
 
Expand network of regional emergency management partnerships  
Building on the success of the Integrated Partnership for Regional Emergency Management in 
Metro Vancouver (IPREM), EMBC is currently exploring the establishment of other/ new regional 
emergency management partnerships.  
Deliverables  
2014/15: Develop a strategy for establishing regional emergency management partnerships 
between municipalities, regional districts and the province. 
2015/17:  Expand the framework of regional emergency management partnerships, beyond Metro 
Vancouvers IPREM, to other jurisdictions across British Columbia.  
 
 
  
15 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
Partnerships with existing emergency management organizations 
EMBC aims to enhance and capitalize on current agreements including the Pacific Northwest 
Emergency Management Agreement (PNEMA), the Canadian Council of Emergency Management 
Organizations (CCEMO), the Emergency Management Mutual Aid Arrangement (EMMA) and 
Requests for Federal Assistance. 
Deliverables  
2014/15: Deliver the provincial operational guidelines for Requests for Federal Assistance.  
2014/15: Update PNEMA operational guidelines before handover to next chair of Western Region 
Economic Mutual Aid Compact (WREMAC). 
2015/16:  Participate in the development of the operational guidelines for the CCEMO Emergency 
Management Mutual Aid Agreement. 
 
Public Safety Lifeline Volunteers  
As part of the Public Service Lifeline Volunteers (PSLV), 
thousands of people across the province volunteer time 
and expertise in preparing for and responding to 
emergencies and disasters.  This is comprised of six 
groups: Search and Rescue, Emergency Social Services, 
Emergency Radio Communications, PEP Air, Road 
Rescue and General Services.  EMBC provides ongoing 
support to these groups in various forms to ensure 
service provision across the province.  
Deliverables  
2014/17: Deliver formal recognition program to 
support PSL Volunteers. 
 
2015/16: Review and revitalize Radio Communications 
volunteer program to enhance linkages to 
catastrophic earthquake plans. 
 
2014/17: Review and update volunteer policies to 
support operational readiness and responder safety. 
 
16 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
National Disaster Mitigation Program  
Actively pursue mitigation funding through the National Disaster Mitigation Program (NDMP) 
currently under development by the federal government.   
Deliverables  
2015/16: Complete consultation with the federal government on the structure and feasibility of a 
new NDMP. 
2016/17: If approved, develop and implement the provincial element of a new NDMP. 
  
17 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
Line of Effort 5: Public Education 
The degree of individual preparedness in an emergency will determine the capacity of a community 
to be resilient during a disaster. If individuals are sufficiently prepared it also reduces the stress load 
on the emergency management system. For these reasons, EMBC goes to great effort to 
encourage personal preparedness.  
 
Education initiatives 
EMBC will develop and implement an evidence-based 
approach to province-wide education strategies and 
programs in order to strengthen emergency 
preparedness in all communities across the province.   
Deliverables  
2014/15: Conduct comprehensive public needs 
assessment to provide a foundation to develop 
sustainable strategies and priorities to support EMBCs 
goals, as well as the public and stakeholder needs. 
 
2014/15:  Review and update hazard specific materials 
in support of operational and seasonal readiness 
including Getting to Know Fire, and Earthquake and 
Tsunami Smart. 
 
2014/15: Deliver an earthquake public education campaign. 
 
2015/16: Implement strategies and priorities based on the public education needs assessment. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
18 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
Line of Effort 6: Business Practices and Governance  
EMBC has identified business practices and governance mechanisms that require development or 
improvement.  
 
Improve financial processes and governance 
Each year, millions of dollars are expended in response and recovery costs.  A review of financial 
processes and governance will determine if efficiencies are available and help to inform policy 
direction, improve decision making, and support return on investment research. 
Deliverables  
2014/15: Develop a management framework that supports the development of current financial 
procedures and determines training requirements. 
2015/16: Implement new financial procedures and supporting policy if necessary. 
 
Establish an annual reporting process 
EMBC has made a commitment to report annually to British 
Columbians. This will provide an opportunity to keep emergency 
preparedness at the forefront of priorities for individuals, families, 
stakeholders and government partners.  
Deliverables  
2014/15: Publish an annual synopsis on EMBCs overall state of 
preparedness. 
2015/16: Develop strategies to analyze and assess on the provincial government and Crown 
corporations overall state of preparedness. 
2016/17: Develop strategies to analyze and assess on British Columbias overall state of 
preparedness. 
 
 
 
  
19 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
Review of Emergency Program Act and associated regulations 
The Emergency Program Act (EPA) provides the legislative framework for the management of 
disasters and emergencies within British Columbia.  Amendments to the legislation are required to 
ensure the province is in a position to lead the management of provincial emergencies and disasters 
and to empower other authorities within their areas of jurisdiction.  
Deliverables  
2014/15: Undergo a review of the legislation to identify areas for improvement. 
 
2015/16: Request that amendments to the EPA to be on the legislative agenda for spring 2016. 
 
2015/17: Review and amend supporting regulations to the EPA. 
 
 
After action reports and lessons learned 
Learning from disasters and emergencies, 
both internal and external to EMBC is a vital 
part of enhancing our ability to improve as 
an organization.  After action reporting 
allows us to learn from our own and others 
experiences and improves our ability to lead 
the province in the management of 
emergencies and disasters. 
Deliverables  
2014/15: EMBC will implement a consistent, 
structured, and scalable approach to after 
action reviews.  
 
 
 
 
20 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
The following table outlines the timeframe for specific work deliverables according to their 
strategic lines of effort: 
 
 
 Year One  Year Two  Year Three  
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
 x Develop staffing plan x If feasibility supports  
Organizational x Report on feasibility of it, implement 
Capacity Provincial Coordination Provincial 
Capacity Coordination 
 Capacity framework 
 x Develop multi-year road x Develop sustained x Determine the 
Catastrophic map for earthquake response section of feasibility for 
Earthquake preparedness earthquake plan Tsunami inundation 
Preparedness x Report on earthquake x Explore using PENS modelling 
consultation with and emergent x Facilitate the Inter-
stakeholders technologies for Agency Emergency 
x Develop immediate warning of additional Preparedness 
response section of hazards Council (IEPC) 
earthquake plan x Implement approved recovery planning 
x Enhance PENS for tsunami Government Services x Develop critical 
notification Branch Plan infrastructure 
x Enhance communication x Develop a list of operational plan 
ability for senior officials provincial critical x Contingent on 
x Update the Cross infrastructure assets funding, develop 
Government Mission x Contingent on enhanced 
Critical List funding, develop information 
x Complete the draft enhanced systems 
Government Services information systems 
Branch Plan  
x Develop a critical 
infrastructure assessment 
tool 
x Contingent on funding, 
develop enhanced 
information systems 
21 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
 Year One  Year Two  Year Three  
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
 x Deliver PECC and PREOC x Deliver training to x Deliver training to 
Training and training  senior provincial senior provincial 
Exercising x Develop and deliver government officials government 
training to senior x Exercise PECC and officials 
provincial government PREOC under x Exercise PECC and 
officials catastrophic scenario PREOC under 
x Deliver training to external x Exercise the roles and catastrophic 
volunteer organizations responsibilities of scenario 
and stakeholders senior ministerial x Participate in the 
x Deliver elected officials officials Washington State 
training x Exercise the emergency 
x Exercise PECC and PREOC activation of the management 
under catastrophic Emergency Response exercise 
scenario Unit  
x Exercise the 
immediate response 
framework of the 
earthquake plan 
 x Develop a strategy to x Implement x Implement 
Partnerships enhance support to local deliverables from deliverables from 
government emergency support to local support to local 
programs government strategy government 
x Develop a strategy to x Expand the footprint strategy 
expand the IPREM of regional x Volunteer 
concept emergency recognition 
x Update PNEMA management program 
operational guidelines partnerships x Review and update 
x Strategy for volunteer x Participate in volunteer policies 
integration development of x If approved, 
x Deliver volunteer CCEMO operational develop provincial 
recognition program guidelines element of NDMP 
x Review and update x Volunteer recognition 
volunteer policies program 
x Review emergency 
volunteer radio 
communication 
program 
x Review and update 
volunteer policies 
x Complete NDMP 
consultation 
22 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
 Year One  Year Two  Year Three  
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
 x Deliver earthquake public x Implement public x Implement public 
Public education campaign education strategy education strategy 
Education x Conduct public education based on public based on public 
needs assessment needs assessment needs assessment 
x Review hazard specific 
materials 
 x Develop a framework that x Implement new x Develop strategy 
Business supports the development financial procedures for reporting on 
Practices and of current financial and policy if British Columbias 
Governance processes supported by overall state of 
x Publish annual synopsis on previous analysis preparedness 
EMBCs overall state of x Develop strategy for x Review and amend 
preparedness reporting on supporting 
x Review EPA provincial Regulations to the 
x Develop after action government and EPA 
reporting process crown corporations   
 overall state of 
preparedness 
x Request amendments 
to the EPA to be on 
the legislative agenda 
 
 
 
 
  
23 
Emergency Management BC  Strategic Plan 
2014/2015  2016/2017 / Version 1.0 
 
Supporting Our Workforce 
Training and Exercising 
In 2014/15, staff training and exercising will focus on PECC and PREOC Emergency Operations, 
particularly in response to a seismic event.  
 
Professional Development  
Learning from disasters and emergencies, both internal and external to EMBC is a vital part of 
improving our ability to improve as an organization and enhances staff capabilities.  EMBC will 
capitalize on opportunities to learn from other jurisdictions that have faced disasters. EMBC will 
also develop a plan to enhance organizational learning by creating formal linkages with academic 
and educational institutions and supporting a new framework for professional development.  
Succession Management 
In light of its demographics, EMBC will review its succession management and make 
recommendations for actions as appropriate. This work includes ensuring the continuity of 
knowledge and skills, especially in critical positions. 
 
Communications 
EMBCs initiatives and change efforts will continue to be accompanied by change management and 
communication plans which clearly illustrate how intended outcomes fit with the Branchs vision 
and strategic direction, and which provide opportunities for engagement and feedback. Concrete 
efforts will also be made to improve communications between the different sections of EMBC.  
 
Performance Management 
EMBC will continue to support the MyPerformance process to ensure that all branch employees 
have the same opportunities for discussion and development of employment goals and career 
paths with their supervisor.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
