
 
Recommendations. 
1. Coordination of research activities in the State of California. 
Earthquakes threaten the entire infrastructure of California. Many federal, state, and academic 
organizations are thus involved in earthquake research for California.   Private corporations, 
especially utilities, are also investing significant resources in earthquake mitigation.  The State 
must encourage cooperation and coordination among these various efforts in order to maximize 
the return on its investment. First, the Commission should more actively address its mandate to 
coordinate earthquake research in the State of California.  The Commission should provide an 
evaluation of the research goals of the relevant state agencies to the Governor and ensure 
effective coordination among them.  Second, the Commission recommends that the State should 
direct its support through programs and centers that have proven effective agents for coordinating 
the efforts of scientists and engineers, helping to focus their research towards practical goals 
useful to Californias mitigation efforts.   
2. Research Priorities. 
The State has already prepared a California Earthquake Loss Reduction Plan (CSSC, 2002) that 
highlights activities needed to reduce losses from earthquakes. Within these activities, several are 
recognized as critically important.  These critical areas for State investment are where the Federal 
effort falls short of the level needed, or areas where the State can leverage a federal program into 
an activity particularly useful to reducing losses in California, as follows: 
a. Improve hazard assessments. Improve the understanding of the likelihood, location, and size 
of future earthquakes, landslides and ground failure. 
b. Support seismic monitoring. Support earthquake-monitoring networks to improve emergency 
response and create the data on future earthquakes that are needed to understand seismic 
hazard and to facilitate critical research programs. The State needs to maintain this support to 
sustain emergency response as one of the important goals of the system. 
  i 
 
c. Develop cost-effective mitigation strategies. Improve strategies for ensuring cost-effective 
loss reduction, including new technologies for earthquake-resistant design, incentives for 
retrofitting and for higher performance standards for new construction. 
d. Systematically catalog post-earthquake investigations. Ensure the timely acquisition, 
analysis, and management of post-earthquake investigations in much more systematic and 
rigorous ways.   
e. Understand our social and economic vulnerabilities. Understand the effects of earthquakes 
on our economy and how best to motivate the citizenry to take personal responsibility for 
their earthquake safety, including better tools to quantify the financial impacts of earthquakes 
and the costs of various mitigation measures. 
f. Encourage new product development. Support research directly focused on creating products 
that can be used to improve seismic safety such as hybrid materials, wireless technologies, 
and earthquake response modification devices described later. 
3. Implement research results into practice. 
To make a difference in earthquake risk mitigation, the community of owners, operators, 
regulators, and design professionals that create our buildings and other structures must ultimately 
adopt relevant findings of seismic research into their policies, codes, practices, and standards. 
Research program managers should plan projects to increase researcher awareness of industry 
practices, tailor balanced portfolios of basic and applied research having a range of payoff 
horizons, and maintain strong outreach components within their programs to ensure that proven 
research results are implemented in practice.  At the other end of the implementation spectrum, 
infrastructure owner/operator/regulators need to support innovation and seek paths to put the 
research into practice. 
4. Continue to Support Cost-effective Research  
The activities recommended in this report for the states support will directly contribute to 
improving the effectiveness of earthquake-mitigation expenditures, and thus contribute to the 
long-term health of the California economy. Because so much of the Nations earthquake 
vulnerability is in California, the Federal government expects cost sharing from California on 
many of its research projects, but this also means that any California investment can leverage 
significant Federal funds.   
  ii 
 
Justification 
Earthquakes present a major financial and safety risk to the future of California, the nations most 
seismically vulnerable state.  The 1994 Northridge earthquake cost our society $40 billion, yet it 
was far from the largest possible earthquake disaster.  Moreover, the seismic risk (see insert) is 
growing  not because earthquakes are 
occurring more frequently but because the Seismic hazarddescribes the earthquake 
population and buildings in California, and thus shaking that can be expected over the long 
term. The hazard depends on the proximity to 
the people and dollars at risk, are increasing.  A active faults and the size of the earthquakes 
recent study by the Federal Emergency those faults might generate, and it can be 
Management Agency suggests that the expected expressed in the form of a seismic hazard 
annualized earthquake losses just in building map.  In contrast, seismic risk describes the 
damage in the state of California exceed $3 damage expected over the long term, usually 
billion per year (FEMA, 1999) and constitute measured as loss of lives or dollars. The risk 
3/4 of the Nations total risk.  This level of loss depends not only on the seismic hazard but 
obviously does not happen every year but some also on three additional factors: the regions 
years will be disastrous; a major earthquake in a exposureto seismic damage (its population, 
metropolitan area could, like the 1995 Kobe, number of buildings, and infrastructure), the 
vulnerabilityof its built structures to seismic 
Japan, earthquake, cost hundreds of billions of shaking, and the resiliency of its commun-
dollars.  Moreover, the loss of competitiveness ities once damage has occurred.  The seismic 
and market share for Californias economy hazard levels in Alaska and California are 
during recovery could itself have serious both high, but Californias risk is much 
consequences for the State for decades. greater, because of its greater exposure.  
The losses can be reduced through planning and 
mitigation and the state has an obligation to do what it can.  The experience of the last few 
decades has shown that mitigation  modifying our buildings and infrastructure to better 
withstand earthquakes  pays off in reduced losses when earthquakes do occur.  The goal of 
earthquake research in California is to determine what mitigation will do the most good.  
Thus, the state of California should support research that is focused on reducing earthquake 
losses, thereby creating a safer and more resilient California.  The federal government, through 
the National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program (NEHRP), sponsors a combination of basic 
and applied research on the causes of earthquakes, their distribution, and their damage to the built 
environment.  The knowledge gained by this research is paying off in the ability to anticipate and 
reduce earthquake destruction.  However, this information needs to be implemented into effective 
loss reduction mechanisms by the state government and the private sector through regulatory 
policies, economic incentives, long-term investments, and public education.  The focus of the 
State research program should be to leverage the federal investment in earthquake research to 
meet specific loss reduction goals for California. 
 
A. Coordination. 
Earthquakes threaten the infrastructure of California and thus most State agencies address the 
problem in some way.  A few agencies, such as the , have seismic 
safety as their prime mission.  Several others, such as the Departments of Conservation, and 
Transportation have a large part of their mission involving earthquakes or earthquake mitigation.  
Many more agencies, including those regulating all utilities and essential services, such as the 
Energy Commission, Department of Water Resources, Office of Emergency Services, and Office 
of Statewide Health Planning and Development, need information about earthquakes to complete 
their mission.  Each State agency responds to research needs of its specific legislative mandates.  
  1 
 
The State could make more effective use of its research dollars by coordinating research across 
agency boundaries. 
Beyond State agencies, many federal and private entities are involved in earthquake research in 
California.  The U. S. Geological Survey and the National Science Foundation through grants to 
State and private universities invest many of the resources of the National Earthquake Hazard 
Reduction Program in California.  While a major effort that contributes significantly to 
earthquake risk reduction in California, the goals of this program are set at the national level and 
federal appropriations have never reached authorized amounts.  Many private corporations, 
especially utilities, also invest significant resources in earthquake mitigation in California.  By 
bringing them to the table, the State could leverage its investment in research with the efforts of 
these other entities and be much more cost effective. 
Academic consortia that bring together diverse 
researchers to focus on common goals, such as the Research partnering really works.  For 
Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC) and instance, in the NGA Project, PEER, 
the Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research Center SCEC, and USGS are coordinating 
(PEER), have proven particularly effective at focusing research dollars of NSF, USGS, 
academic research efforts towards specific loss FEMA, Caltrans, PG&E and others to 
develop an improved understanding of 
reduction activities. Of particular interest to the State how seismic shaking dies off as it 
are programs fostering cooperation between scientists travels away from the earthquake.  By 
and engineers in adapting new methods of seismic better predicting where the shaking 
hazard analysis to the needs of performance-based will be the worst in upcoming 
engineering.  This type of interdisciplinary earthquakes, we can save dollars and 
collaboration is critical in establishing a firm technical lives through more effective siting and 
basis for civic action and strengthening the resolve of construction of new facilities.  
public officials to improve mitigation strategies.
Recommendation 1:  The Commission should establish a process to bring together the 
government and academic researchers and the primary users of seismic research in California to 
coordinate the various research programs. The goal would to be to enhance the dialog between 
researchers and research users to focus effort where it is most needed.  Representatives should 
therefore be those with decision-making authority in their organizations.  Entities that should be 
included are: 
Federal 
U.S. Geological Survey Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Federal Highway Administration National Science Foundation 
National Institute of Standards and Technology  
State 
California Geological Survey State Lands Commission 
Department of Water Resources California Energy Commission 
California Department of Transportation 
California Office of Emergency Service Division of the State Architect 
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection Department of Insurance 
Housing and Community Development Office of Statewide Health Planning and  
                                Development 
Academic 
University of California California State University 
Southern California Earthquake Center Pacific Earthquake Engineering Center 
  2 
 
Recommendation 2: The State should encourage research through academic consortia that focus 
researchers on loss reduction goals, and it should help them leverage federal funding to achieve 
the priority objectives of the California research plan. 
 
B. Research priorities. 
Research supported by the State should be clearly connected to the goals set forth in the 
California Earthquake Loss Reduction Plan.  The Commission believes that the following 
recommendations will support the specific goals of Californias Earthquake Loss Reduction Plan: 
to learn from earthquakes, to live with earthquakes, and to build for earthquakes. 
Recommendation 3: Improve hazard assessments. The first step in developing a cost-effective 
program to reduce earthquake losses is to understand where earthquake damage is most likely.  
The big picture of earthquake risk in California is relatively well understood; the State straddles a 
boundary between major tectonic plates, resulting in a network of faults producing earthquakes at 
the highest rate in the conterminous United States.  However, the unknown details of this picture 
 the exact distribution of faults, the times of earthquake occurrences, the patterns of shaking 
produced by individual earthquakes, and the response of local rock and soils to the shaking, lead 
to a high level of uncertainty with large financial consequences for California.  
Therefore, a high priority research objective is to reduce the level of uncertainty in the hazard 
assessment.  This goal includes: 
 Develop a better understanding of the physics of earthquakes to permit a more accurate 
prediction of the consequent ground shaking and potentially the timing of future earthquakes. 
 Continue investigation of earthquake history of faults to better understand how frequently 
earthquakes occur, their magnitudes and their relation to earthquakes on nearby faults. 
 Provide a better understanding of the regional 
interaction between earthquakes including 
triggering, both local and distant, and other 
factors that could affect the timing of 
earthquakes. 
 Improve our understanding of the effects of 
local geology, especially basins and valleys, on 
the amplitude of ground shaking.  Even though 
it is widely accepted that large bodies of soft 
soils amplify ground shaking, the degree of 
amplification is still debated.  Underestimation 
Student interns with the Southern Calif-of the amplification can lead to under-design of 
ornia Earthquake Center map details of structures.  Similarly, overestimation of the 
the San Andreas fault near Palmdale to amplification, and its damage potential, leads to 
determine the time of past earthquakes. unnecessary design and construction costs. 
 Improve our understanding of triggered events 
landslides, liquefaction and tsunami -- and their risk factors.  In localized areas, liquefaction 
(where the ground loses its strength and acts like a liquid during the earthquake) and 
earthquake induced landslides can cause significant damage beyond that caused by the 
shaking alone. For tsunami, the hazard in California is not well understood.  California has 
little experience, at least south of Cape Mendocino, with tsunami generated by local 
earthquakes.  There is evidence in the historic literature that they have occurred.  How do 
  3 
 
underwater landslides, earthquake-triggered or not, add to the hazard?  Here again, modeling 
can help, but a better understanding of the frequency and type of fault displacement of 
earthquakes on under-sea faults is necessary. 
 Completion of seismic hazard zone maps for all urban areas at risk in California.  At the 
present time, only about one half of the communities at high risk from earthquakes have been 
zoned for liquefaction and earthquake-induced 
landslides.  This leaves significant new 
construction without the benefits of 
determining appropriate mitigation against the 
ground-failure hazards.  In addition, current 
zones only place a property in or out of the 
zone without a measure of the severity of the 
threat.   
Recommendation 4. Support seismic 
monitoring.  Beyond knowing where the 
earthquakes will occur, we need to document and 
predict how those earthquakes will move the 
ground.  This is accomplished with seismic 
monitoring networks that record the fundamental 
data about the size and timing of earthquakes (the 
earthquake catalog) and how the ground moved 
during the earthquake (records of ground shaking). 
The earthquake catalog is used to determine rates 
of earthquake occurrence and thus probabilities for Supporting Decision-Makers. 
future events, as well as to understand the rela-The M7.1 Hector Mine earthquake struck a 
tionship between geologic structures and the sparsely populated region of southern Califor-
earthquakes they produce.  The ground shaking nia at 2: 47 a.m. on October 16, 1999. 
information is used to understand what controls Caltrans procedures for a major event called 
the level and style of shaking, to predict what for inspections of all roads within a large 
region surrounding the epicenter.   
shaking will be produced in future earthquakes Within 5 minutes of the earthquake, the 
and, thus, how to build buildings to withstand that predecessor to CISN had posted a map on the 
shaking. Web, showing the distribution of shaking 
The major seismic networks in California have intensities in the earthquake.  Using this 
combined to form the California Integrated information, the Caltrans dispatcher was able 
Seismic Network (CISN).  The CISN is funded by to determine that, because of the events 
remote location, only a few roads would need 
many agencies, including the U.S. Geological inspection, thereby saving substantial effort 
Survey as part of the Advanced National Seismic and tens of thousands of dollars that morning.
Network, the State through the University of 
California, the California Geological Survey and the Governors Office of Emergency Services, 
and by private partners, including the California Institute of Technology, Southern California 
Edison, and the Pacific Gas and Electric Company.  
The CISN is critical for the States emergency response.  The CISNs real-time products that 
provide rapid estimates of areas of strong shaking and probable damage have changed the nature 
of emergency response, allowing decisions to be made with much more information.  The 
transformation of what had been solely research networks at academic and research institutions 
into critical emergency response tools has been accomplished primarily through additional 
resources from FEMA and OES.  Creating a multi-purpose seismic system that serves both 
research and emergency response needs is an effective leverage of federal research dollars to 
  4 
 
fulfill the States needs.  The State needs to maintain this support to keep emergency response as 
one of the important goals of the system. 
But the CISN is also a fundamental research tool. We need data on past earthquakes to know 
what to expect in the future.  The rate at which earthquakes occur, the shaking they produce, and 
the damage that they do must be measured.  As the state at greatest risk, California is also the 
state with the most to offer to earthquake mitigation science, through the documentation of our 
earthquakes and their effects.  The state should move toward real-time measurement of the 
response of buildings and other structures so that the integrity of the structures can be quickly 
evaluated.  Measurements of ground motions should continue in order to provide the 
observational basis for improving prediction of strong ground motions.  This is not only 
important for structural response, but also for improving estimates of ground failure.  
Measurements are needed in areas of saturated, soft soils and in mountainous regions to improve 
models of liquefaction and slope failure triggered by earthquakes. 
Recommendation 5. Develop cost-effective mitigation strategies. Once we understand where 
the earthquakes will be and how they will cause the ground to shake, we must address how that 
shaking will affect our buildings.  California Cost-Effective Mitigation Strategies 
has building codes and a regulatory One University of California campus has 
environment capable of achieving a much promoted a close working relation between 
higher degree of earthquake resistance than earthquake professionals and researchers, 
was possible in the past.  These advances resulting in cost savings and improved seismic 
have come about through research on how safety. 
construction behaves during earthquakes, and For example, redevelopment of an existing 
how to improve that behavior through building required assessment of its foundation. 
application of new technologies. We are at a Research on elements of the foundation found 
time when small research investments still them to be much stronger than current code 
provisions had predicted.  This enabled the project 
are reaping a large benefit in terms of to usethe existing foundation, at a net cost 
earthquake mitigation for new construction.  savings exceeding $600,000 on this project alone. 
We also must address the problems posed by The results were disseminated to earthquake 
existing construction built to earlier, less professionals so the cost savings will be 
rigorous, building codes. The research goals multiplied.  
to accomplish these objectives include: 
 Continue and expand research efforts in support 
More cost-effective mitigation strategies 
On another university campus, earthquake of performance-based earthquake engineering 
engineers approached seismic retrofit of an design so that the infrastructure critical to 
existing hazardous building using new safety, security, and jobs (for example, 
engineering tools developed through emergency response facilities, bridges critical to 
California-funded research.  The new economic activity of a region, and high-tech 
approaches allowed the building to be industrial facilities) is available when it is most 
retrofit using a scheme that was much less needed following the next big earthquake.   
architecturally intrusive. It allowed the 
building to remain fully occupied and  Determine what losses could be expected from 
functional during retrofit, brought retrofit the likely earthquakes and whether we can 
construction costs down from an expected afford to risk these losses, or whether it would 
cost of $5.8M to actual cost of $1.8M, and be cost-effective to raise the standard in the 
resulted in a building whose seismic per-building codes and require improvements to 
formance rating was so improved that the older construction.   
university could use it as part of its post-
earthquake emergency system.   Because it may not be feasible to mandate 
higher standards, we should fund research to 
identify incentives that would encourage owners 
  5 
 
to design for higher earthquake performance levels.   
 Determine how to cost-effectively mitigate the risk from existing structures. Identifying 
existing structures that might pose a seismic hazard is relatively straightforward and can be 
accomplished with existing technologies.  The problem is that it is often too costly to 
seismically retrofit the entire infrastructure.  The challenge, then, is to develop techniques for 
sorting out those structures that pose the highest risk and that can benefit most from seismic 
retrofit, then direct our mitigation resources to those structures.   
 Identify cost-effective mitigation strategies for the most hazardous existing construction.  
Appropriate research can establish the financial and safety aspects of the existing hazardous 
construction problem, and develop appropriate policy or incentives to address it.  
Furthermore, research can identify effective technical solutions to mitigate deficiencies in 
existing construction. 
Recommendation 6. Encourage new product development. New technologies can help solve 
many of the problems we face in creating a more 
earthquake-resistant constructed environment.  The ground 
will continue to move in future earthquakes but structures 
can potentially be built to ride out the shaking without 
damage.  The State should support research directly focused 
on creating products that can be used to improve seismic 
safety.  Examples include: 
 Hybrid Materials. During the past few years, 
technological advances have emerged that hold great 
promise to improve the effectiveness and reduce the 
cost of mitigation.  Opportunities are almost within our 
grasp for much more widespread use of new hybrid 
materials that are lighter, cheaper, and more resilient 
than anything currently available to the engineering 
community. Their development will make it 
significantly less expensive to design, construct, or 
A bridge column test specimen retrofit buildings, bridges, and other structures to resist 
after it has been cracked by a earthquake motions.   
simulated earthquake at UC San  Wireless Technologies.  We are making great strides in 
Diego.  Caltrans funded this information and wireless technologies.  The installation 
research. 
of wireless networks of sensors in buildings Search and rescue opportunity. 
and structures that can transmit real-time People trapped inside collapsed buildings 
information on performance to transportation have a good chance of survival if rescued 
and highway officials, emergency responders, promptly; a chance that rapidly diminishes 
and researchers would improve our response quickly as hours pass.  The rescue workers 
capabilities in each of these areas dramatically.  know this, but the scarcity of effective tools 
Research is needed to place these sensors in the and equipment greatly limit what they can do 
highest risk urban areas and to determine how without adding to the injuries of those 
trapped.  Using cutting torches and other 
to interpret the information to evaluate the small hand and power tools to remove 
response of our built environment to building components, essentially piece by 
earthquakes.    piece, they undertake a process resembling 
 Response Modification Devices. Not only are fighting a fire with a bucket brigade.  
we looking to the development of new A similar problem in freeing people from 
wrecked automobiles led to the development 
of the jaws of life.  Effective earthquake 
rescue needs jaws, too. 
  6 
 
materials and technologies, but new design tools are also on the horizon. Researchers are 
focusing on the development of a range of response modification devices designed to 
dissipate the shaking from the earthquake in non-destructive ways. These new tools offer an 
economic means to protect historic structures, and maintain functionality of hospitals and 
other critical facilities in the immediate aftermath of an earthquake. These smart buildings, 
designed with sensors, energy dissipating and isolating devices and hybrid materials are at the 
cutting edge of advances in earthquake engineering and hold great promise to reduce future 
losses in our State. 
Recommendation 7. Conduct post-earthquake investigations. Once the earthquake occurs, 
many types of ephemeral data need to be collected, to improve future research efforts.  This 
information captures the lessons that emerge from earthquakes and is crucial to improving 
understanding of how to reduce earthquake losses.  Post earthquake data collection includes 
documenting:  
 The impact of earthquakes on the ground on which buildings, bridges, ports and harbors are 
built, to understand how ground shaking and ground failures affect those structures; 
 The response of buildings, bridges, lifelines and other structures, to compare their actual 
performance to laboratory simulations and design expectations; 
 The performance of the built environment under actual earthquake forces, so new structures 
of all kinds can be better designed and 
existing structures more effectively 
strengthened to resist damage in future 
earthquakes and other extreme events; 
 Economic damages and losses to 
government, businesses, and families, to 
improve predictive risk and loss models 
 The performance of the emergency 
response system, to understand how it 
reacted, and how it can be improved to 
make communities more disaster resistant; 
and 
 The number of deaths and injuries and their The Acorn building in Paso Robles collapsed in 
causes, the number and types of people the December 22, 2003 San Simeon earthquake, 
who require shelter and housing, to help killing two people.  The building was torn down 
communities better prepare for future within weeks so data for an engineering analysis 
disasters of all types. of why it collapsed had to be collected quickly. 
This information enables engineers to improve the design and construction of new structures and 
to strengthen existing structures to withstand future events; such information has been a primary 
basis for improvements in building codes, making California a much safer place to live.  It helps 
emergency responders and recovery managers develop more effective plans, and it enables 
communities and the State of California to plan for and reduce the social and economic impacts 
that earthquakes cause.  
All of this information is critical to reducing future losses in California, but unfortunately some of 
these data are highly perishable and can disappear in the first few hours or days after an 
earthquake.  As communities attempt to recover, damaged buildings and bridges are quickly 
removed or repaired.  Even adverse weather can wash away important geotechnical evidence of 
damage to ports and harbors before researchers can study the extent of ground failure or 
  7 
 
liquefaction.  On the other hand, data on societal and economic impacts must be collected in a 
coordinated manner over a period of months or even years in order for researchers to fully 
understand how different social, ethnic, and 
economic communities were affected.  It is 
important that a coordinated, multi-phased 
data collection effort be mounted after every 
significant earthquake.  
Many agencies and organizations are 
involved in this activity including the U.S. 
Geological Survey, the California 
Geological Survey (for geoscience data) and 
the Earthquake Engineering Research 
Institute (for engineering construction and 
design, lifeline, and social and policy data). 
The State should support the existing groups 
that undertake post-earthquake data 
Opportunity lost. Researchers from many agencies collection in California. A fund for this 
collected detailed data on household damages and purpose has been set up, one that holds 
losses from the 1994 Northridge earthquake immed-unspent funds over fiscal year boundaries 
iately after the event.  Unfortunately, the lack of (Section 8690.45 Government Code). Rules 
systematic data collection and storage, concerns should be established for use and 
about privacy, and insurance regulations reduced replenishment of the fund.  The State should 
access to and use of these data by researchers who make a commitment to keep the fund at a 
are trying to understand the full range of impacts of certain level.  Use of the fund should be 
the earthquake to help reduce future losses. coordinated through one State agency.  The 
Commission, responsible for coordination of 
research, would be the natural agency to coordinate the funding of post-earthquake investigations.  
Administration of the fund would have to include having instruments in place so that funding can 
be provided rapidly following earthquakes to qualified investigators. 
Recommendation 8. Understand our social 
and economic vulnerabilities. To actually 
reduce losses, the results of the research on 
hazard and building response must be 
incorporated into land use planning and other 
public policy.  The cost-effective application 
requires a detailed understanding of our 
economic vulnerability as well as means to 
motivate our citizenry to undertake personal 
responsibility for their earthquake safety.  
An important tool to accomplish this is 
software to estimate losses from known 
geologic and engineering factors.  The State 
should support the development of an open and Damage to the Turley Wine Cellars in the 
more robust loss estimation capability. Both December 22, 2003 San Simeon earthquake. 
the methodology and the inventory must be 
improved in order to provide more realistic estimates of future losses and to assist in determining 
cost-effective mitigation measures.  The methodology must be publicly developed and main-
tained, so that new research can be readily and easily incorporated into model improvements.  
  8 
 
This will help evaluate the cost-effectiveness of mitigation, provide validation for proprietary 
models used for earthquake insurance, and improve emergency response planning. 
Other social and public factors that affect earthquake policy also must be understood, including: 
 How to make better use of the roles of regulatory agencies and the insurance and lending 
industries in promoting improved seismic performance? 
 Which existing California laws and programs inadvertently work against improved seismic 
performance? 
  How does the cost of tax incentives and other creative lending or financing programs 
compare to the financial cost that will be incurred by the State and Federal treasuries, if no 
action is taken? 
 What new or more effective programs could enable individuals, small business owners, major 
corporations, as well as government agencies, to take the steps necessary to create a safer 
society? 
 
C. Implementation of Research Results. 
To have a real impact on earthquake risk mitigation, the community of owners, operators, 
regulators, and design professionals must ultimately adopt relevant findings of earthquake 
research into their policies, codes, 
practices, and standards.  Unfortunately, The Interdependent Roles of Government and 
it is widely recognized that far too Industry in Implementing Seismic Research 
much valuable research does not find its  
way into practice in a timely and 
efficient manner.  The consequences are 
missed opportunities to reduce life and 
property losses for the State of 
California.  
The process of research implementation 
can be viewed as an interactive process 
with three foci: 1) basic research, 2) 
applied research, and 3) industry 
adoption.  Basic research is typically 
conducted by specialized researchers 
working in academic or government  
laboratories.  At the other end of the 
process are architects and engineers who design earthquake-resistant structures, the owners who 
hire them and the regulators who oversee the process. The role of applied research is to span the 
gap between these two groups by selecting and converting basic research discoveries into design 
tools and policies that can be used.  Applied research supplies a critically important, and often 
overlooked, component to the implementation process by developing tools so stakeholder 
communities can apply the new results in a practical setting.  
Recommendation 9. Support research implementation activities.  Managers of basic research 
programs must work to coordinate their efforts where they can lead toward useful products.  It is 
important to note here that the very nature of basic research is the high-risk process of discovery, 
and not all basic research can or should be focused toward short-term implementation goals.   
  9 
 
However, program managers interested 
in reducing seismic risk should make 
researchers aware of industry practices, 
tailor balanced portfolios of basic RiRisksk
research having a range of payoff lelevevell
horizons, and ensure strong outreach 
components within their programs.  At 
the other end of the implementation 
spectrum, infrastructure owner/oper-
ator/regulators need to adopt a 
proactive posture that supports No enNo enttrryy
Informed an andd  
innovation and seeks paths for rapid compensate  ordinary wo workers s 
implementation.  Finally, the critical workers o only and and occupants
role of user-focused applied research 
must be better recognized and time a after  earthquake
 
supported in order to assure that Research collaboration between seismologists, 
research advances that have immediate engineers, and industry has demonstrated benefits.  In 
uses can be more rapidly adapted to this example, research scientists and engineers helped 
practice. State-of-the-art project California utilities develop a post-earthquake building 
management methodologies and tagging system that recognized the reduced risk of 
techniques should be applied where aftershocks with time after an earthquake 
appropriate in order to produce timely 
deliverables of research products. 
 
D. Continue to Support Cost-effective Research 
The State of California and its citizens and businesses invest large sums in capital construction 
every year.  The Construction Industry Research Bureau estimated that $64 billion was spent on 
total construction activity in 2002.  At least $3 billion was spent on activities to reduce future 
earthquake losses.  California must make sure that this investment in earthquake mitigation is 
used effectively.   
Seismic research is critical to achieving this goal.  Past research has uncovered important 
information on the seismic hazard and how to build more safely, helping California avoid 
disasters that occur in other parts of the world even in moderate earthquakes.  Research has 
provided information technologies such as ShakeMap, which in the 2003 San Simeon earthquake 
facilitated emergency response and business recovery.  These and other past investments in 
research have led to reduced losses and greater resiliency in California today.  But the work is not 
finished.  We need to continue this investment by the State to make the State more resilient and to 
leverage the significant Federal investment in earthquake research in California.  If California is 
seen as not contributing its share, the Federal and private sector investments in research could 
decrease. 
To be most effective for the State of California, the research should be directed toward the most 
critical seismic issues facing the State.  To ensure that this happens, it should be: 
Planned. The research should be well-planned, directed at clear and specific goals and with a 
well-defined purpose in the overall research plan.  Even though serendipity always plays a 
role in the best science, planning is essential. 
  10 
 
Coordinated.  Much of the earthquake research in the United States takes place in California and 
the States support should complement and leverage, not duplicate, the federal research 
efforts. 
Educational. Experience gained during NEHRP demonstrates that a consensus to invest in risk 
reduction is best achieved through an active collaboration among scientists, engineers, 
government officials, and business leaders, working with an informed populace.  A corollary 
is that earthquake research will contribute most to risk reduction when it is carried out in a 
context that educates potential users of the technology. 
Extensible.  Earthquakes are not the only hazard facing California and the best efforts will make 
use of the results in other fields and be of use in multi-hazard risk reduction.  For instance, 
application of earthquake-resistant engineering design principles can help protect structures 
from collapse in a terrorist bombing. 
 
The history of earthquake research in California has shown that the investment in research is 
more than paid back in losses that do not happen in the next earthquake.  The State needs to 
continue its investment so that the billions of dollars it spends each year in earthquake mitigation 
is spent effectively. 
  11 
