 
  
THE CASCADIA SUBDUCTION ZONE: The geography of northern California, Oregon, 
Washington, and southern British Columbia is shaped by the Cascadia subduction zone, 
where the North American Plate collides with a number of smaller plates: the largest of 
these is the Juan de Fuca Plate, flanked by the Explorer Plate to the north and the Gorda 
plate to the south. These smaller plates subduct (descend) beneath the North American 
Plate as they converge along a 700-mile long (1,130 km) boundary. A large portion of the 
boundary between the subducting and overriding plates resists the convergent motion, 
until this part of the boundary breaks in a great earthquake.     
Above: Schematic view of the source area for the largest Cascadia earthquakes. (Image 
adapted from U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1707 (page 8), Atwater et al., 
http://pubs.usgs.gov/pp/pp1707/) 
ONE DAY IN CASCADIA 
 
Photo by Writegeist
Its 8:16 on a chilly, wet morning in early spring. Youve just arrived at work and are pouring a cup of 
coffee when you become aware of a low rumbling noise. Within seconds, the rumbling becomes a roar, 
the floor beneath you heaves, and the building begins to pitch and shake so violently that youre thrown 
to the floor. The roaring is joined by a cacophony of crashing as windows shatter and every unsecured 
object in the roomfrom the desk chair to the coffee potis sent flying. Shaken loose by the 
shuddering and jolting of the building, dust and ceiling particles drift down like snow. Then the lights 
flicker and go out. Remembering to drop, cover, and hold, you crawl under the nearest table, hold on 
tight, and tell yourself that the shaking should last only a few seconds more . . . but it goes on and on.  
This is it: the Big One. The Cascadia subduction zone has just unleashed a magnitude 9.0 earthquake.  
Are you prepared?  
 
IF YOU LIVE IN NORTHERN CALIFORNIA, WASHINGTON, OREGON, OR BRITISH COLUMBIA, YOU LIVE IN CASCADIA, 
a region remarkable for its stunning mountain ranges, rich farmlands and vineyards, beautiful beaches, 
great rivers, and green forests. It is a region of vibrant communities, busy international ports, and 
thriving businesses. Residents and visitors alike enjoy the cultural offerings of Cascadias cities and the 
diversity of outdoor activities at its natural areas. But the geologic forces that shaped the Northwest 
are still active: Cascadia is a region of earthquakes. 
The Cascadia subduction zone is one of the principal sources of concern. Lying mostly offshore, this 
plate interface is a giant faultapproximately 700 miles long (1,130 km). Here, the set of tectonic 
plates to our west is sliding (subducting) beneath the North American Plate. The movement of these 
plates is neither constant nor smooth: the plates are stuck, and the stress will build up until the fault 
suddenly breaks. This last happened in 1700: the result was an earthquake on the order of magnitude 
9.0, followed within minutes by a large tsunamimuch like the earthquake and tsunami that struck 
Japan on March 11, 2011. Stresses have now been building along the Cascadia subduction zone for 
more than 300 years, and the communities of Cascadia can be certain that another great quake will 
again shake the region.         
Because understanding the hazard is an essential step in preparing for it, the Cascadia Region 
Earthquake Workgroup (CREW) first published Cascadia Subduction Zone Earthquakes in 2005. Since 
then, scientists have further developed their understanding of the subduction zone, engineers have 
learned to build more resilient structures, emergency planners have made extensive use of earthquake 
 
 
and tsunami modeling tools to prepare more effectively, and the entire earthquake and emergency 
response community has learned volumes from recent subduction zone earthquakes and tsunamis in 
the Indian Ocean, Chile, and Japan. This second edition of Cascadia Subduction Zone Earthquakes 
incorporates these new developments and lessons, while also noting the progress that has been made 
since 2005 to prepare communities throughout the region for Cascadias next big subduction zone 
earthquake.   
DISCOVERING OUR REGIONS EARTHQUAKE PROFILE 
The Pacific Northwest is prone to earthquakes. This has been demonstrated repeatedly by events as 
recent as the Nisqually earthquake in 2001 and the magnitude 7.7 earthquake off the coast of British 
Columbia in 2012. But what does this really mean in geologic and in human terms, and what is the risk 
to those who live here?  
Tectonic Collision Zone 
The Pacific Northwest has earthquakes because it lies within a tectonic collision zone. British Columbia, 
Washington, Oregon, and most of California sit on the edge of a slab of the earths crust known as the 
North American Plate. This plate is being pushed slowly but inexorably against the system of plates 
beneath the Pacific Ocean just to the west of us: the Juan de Fuca Plate off the coasts of Washington 
and Oregon, the Explorer Plate off British Columbia, and the Gorda Plate off northern California. The 
Juan de Fuca, Explorer, and Gorda plates contain denser rock than the North American Plate and are 
driven beneath it in a process known as subduction. While the average rate of movement may seem 
slowabout 1.6 inches (4 cm) per yearthe plates are massive in size. The slow insistent movement 
that forces them together causes tremendous strain to build up as the plates stick against each other. 
The sudden release of this strain produces an earthquake. 
  
THE CASCADIA SUBDUCTION 
ZONE IN CROSS-SECTION: 
New crust forms at  
spreading ridges  
between the Pacific 
Plate and the Juan  
de Fuca, Gorda, and 
Explorer plates. As 
these three plates 
are pushed east- 
ward, they are 
forced to subduct 
beneath the North 
American Plate.  
Strain builds up 
where they have 
become stuck 
(locked) and will 
be released one 
day in a great 
earthquake. 
 
Image Source: Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries 
Cascadia, 2 
 
Photo Source: 
The collision of the tectonic plates along the Cascadia 
subduction zone and the geometry and geology of the 
plates produce several types of earthquakes, the USGS
intensity and effects of which can differ in significant  
ways:  
Deep EarthquakesThe magnitude 6.8 Nisqually 
earthquake in 2001 was a deep earthquake. This type 
originates in the descending slabthe part that has 
already slipped beneath the edge of the North 
American Plateat a depth of 3037 miles (4860 
km). Deep quakes can be felt over a very large area, 
but typically do less damage than a shallow quake of 
comparable size. This is because the quake originates 
farther below ground and is thus more distant from 
buildings on the surface. Deep quakes typically 
produce few aftershocks large enough to be felt.  
 Shallow or Crustal Earthquakes Shallow quakes Washington  capitol  building  was  
occur within the North American Plate along fractures seriously  damaged  during  the  deep  
created as a result of the collision process and jostling M6.8  Nisqually  earthquake  in  20001..  
of blocks of continental crust. The Northwest is laced 
with such faults, and some even run under metropolitan areas. When a shallow fault breaks, the 
resulting earthquake affects a smaller area than would a deep earthquake of the same magnitude, but 
the shaking is usually more intense, and numerous aftershocks are likely. The two magnitude 6.0 
earthquakes that struck Klamath Falls, Oregon, in 1993 are examples of this type of quake. They were 
followed immediately by many small aftershocks and, some three months later, by a magnitude 5.4 
aftershock. A shallow earthquake may also generate a local tsunami if the rupture lies under a body of 
water. For example, scientists have discovered that a past earthquake greater than magnitude 7.0 on 
Washingtons Seattle fault zone created a tsunami in Puget Sound.  
Subduction Zone EarthquakesThe convergent boundary along which the Explorer, Juan de Fuca, and 
Gorda plates are sinking beneath the North American Plate is a long megathrust fault capable of 
producing very large earthquakes. The most recent event associated with this zone was the Cape 
Mendocino (Petrolia) earthquake in 1992. This magnitude 7.1 quake appears to have been the result of 
EXAMPLES OF RECENT EARTHQUAKES IN THE PACIFIC NO R T H W E S T 
Location Date Magnitude Type/Origin 
Strike-slip at plate boundarysimilar to 
British Columbia: Haida Gwaii (Queen Charlotte 1949 8.1 
Californias San Andreas fault (interplate) 
Islands) 
2012 7.7 Thrust (interplate) 
British Columbia: Vancouver Island 1946 7.3 Shallow/crustal  (intraplate) 
Washington: Nisqually 2001 6.8 Deep (intraplate) 
Oregon: Klamath Falls (2 earthquakes) 1993 6.0 Shallow/crustal (intraplate) 
Oregon: Scott Mills  1993 5.6 Shallow/crustal (intraplate) 
Northern California: Cape Mendocino/Petrolia 1992 7.1 Subduction zone (interplate) 
Cascadia: Pacific Northwest  1700 9.0 Subduction zonefull rupture (interplate) 
(Note: Interplate refers to an event that occurs where two tectonic plates meet; intraplate refers to an event 
that occurs within a single plate.) 
Cascadia, 3 
 
a small rupture at the southern end of the zone. It caused some fifteen miles of coastline to be 
permanently uplifted and produced a small tsunami, which reached Eureka, California, a mere twenty 
minutes later. In addition to generating tsunamis, subduction zone earthquakes are followed by 
significant aftershocks. The Cape Mendocino earthquake, for example, was followed by aftershocks as 
large as M6.5 and 6.7 the day after the main quake.  
On the Trail of the Biggest Quake of All 
While Cascadia is now one of the most closely studied and monitored subduction zones in the world, 
our present understanding of how it works and what to expect from it is relatively recent. It was not 
until the early 1980s that researchers began to recognize the zones potential to produce great 
earthquakes, and it took years of geologic detective work to uncover the evidence.  
The Cascadia subduction zone has not produced a great megathrust earthquake for several centuries, 
and Northwest history offers no written eye-witness accounts, although a few Native American and 
First Nations oral stories do relate some of the effects. Scientists instead found the record of Cascadias 
 past activity in the landscape itself, 
which was altered suddenly and in 
characteristic ways by these great 
earthquakes and the tsunamis they 
Image Source: USGStriggered (as seen in the photo at 
left). Once the scientists realized 
what to look for, they found the 
evidence up and down the coastline, 
on land and on the seafloor, from 
British Columbia to California.  
Evidence for at least 13 great earthquakes on the Cascadia subduction zone was discovered on top of a 
6,600-year-old volcanic ash deposit from Crater Lake in Oregon. The most recent of these earthquakes 
is estimated to have been between magnitude 8.7 and 9.2 and occurred on the evening of January 26, 
1700. We can date it precisely because the giant tsunami that Cascadia triggered flooded coastal 
villages in Japan and was recorded by officials there. In the 300 years since this event, the strain along 
the Cascadia subduction zone has been reloadingbuilding up for the next great earthquake.  
WPhoto Source: NOAA/NGDC, Shunichi Koshimura
HAT ARE GREAT EARTHQUAKES? The worlds 
largest quakes occur along subduction 
zones. Dubbed great earthquakes, the 
magnitude of these events ranges from 8.0 
to 9.0+ (the largest recorded was a 
magnitude 9.5 quake off the coast of Chile 
in 1960). Their characteristics include 
prolonged ground shaking, large tsunamis, 
and numerous aftershocks. Because the 
magnitude scale is logarithmic, each 
increase of one unit signifies that the  
waves radiated by the earthquake are 10-
times larger and 32-times more energetic: 
This means that a M9.0 quake releases 
1,995 times more energy than a M6.8.     
Right: Onagawa, Ishinomaki, after the M9.0 
Tohoku earthquake and tsunami in 2011. 
Cascadia, 4 
 
EXAMPLES OF GR E A T SUBDUCTION ZONE (IN T E R P L A T E) EA R T H Q U A K E S 
Duration Shaking 
Location Date  Size Tsunami Aftershocks (M6.0 or Greater) 
Was Felt 
Cascadia subduction zone, Pacific 
Jan. 26, 1700  M9.0 Unknown Yes Suspected (details unknown) 
Northwest (northern CA to B.C.) (approx.) 
Prince William Sound, Alaska March 27, 1964  M9.2 34 minutes Yes 11 within the first day 
Aceh-Andaman, Sumatra Dec. 26, 2004  M9.1 34 minutes Yes 13 within the first four days 
Maule, Chile Feb. 27, 2010  M8.8 23 minutes Yes 21 within the first two months 
Tohoku, Japan March 11, 2011  M9.0 36 minutes Yes 59  within the first three months 
Compare Washingtons recent 
Few aftershocks felt (the largest 
Nisqually earthquake, an example Feb. 28, 2001  M6.8 Up to 40 seconds No 
measured M4.3) 
of a deep (intraplate) quake. 
ANATOMY OF A CASCADIA SUBDUCTION ZONE EARTHQUAKE 
To prepare effectively, we need to understand the hazard. Fortunately, scientists have been able to 
show not only what the Cascadia subduction zone has done in the past, but what is likely to happen 
when it makes its next move.  
The Locked Zone Breaks 
The Cascadia subduction zone stretches from Cape Mendocino in northern California to Brooks 
Peninsula on Vancouver Island in British Columbia, a distance of about 700 miles (1,130 km). All along 
this zone, which begins beneath the seafloor to the west and extends inland towards the Cascade and 
Coastal mountains, the subducting plates are forced beneath the North American Plate. At a relatively 
shallow depth (less than about 20 miles/30 km down), the plates have become stuck. Below this locked 
zone, warmer temperatures make the plates more pliable, allowing them to move more readily past 
each other. This freer movement deeper down causes strain to accumulate along the locked zone. 
Once that strain is great enough to overcome the friction that keeps the plates locked, the fault will 
rupture: the edge of the North American Plate will lurch suddenly upwards and southwestwards as the 
subducting plates slip under and northeastwards. With this movement, the deformed western edge of 
the North American Plate will flex, causing the land along large sections of Cascadias coastline to drop 
as much as 6.6 feet (2 m) in elevationan effect known as co-seismic subsidence.  
Image
 Source: 
USGS Circular 1187
 
 DYNAMICS OF THE SUBDUCTION ZONE:  The subducting tectonic plate (solid gray) is currently stuck against the over-
riding North American Plate (brown) along the locked zone (marked in red on the first image). This has 
caused the edge of the North American plate to warp and elevate the land. When the pressure finally causes 
the fault to rupture, the North American Plate will flex and drop, producing a major earthquake and tsunami. 
(The dotted lines in the left image mark the level of the land when not warped by accumulated strain; on the 
right, the dotted lines mark the elevation of the distorted plate just before the fault ruptured.) 
Cascadia, 5 
 
The Earthquake Hits 
Although it is possible that the Cascadia subduction zone will rupture section by section in a series of 
large earthquakes (each measuring magnitude 8.0 to 8.5) over a period of years, the earthquake that 
many scientists and emergency planners anticipate is modeled on the zones last major quake: the 
entire fault zone ruptures from end to end, causing one great earthquake measuring magnitude 9.0. 
The shaking that results from this abrupt shifting of the earths crust will be felt throughout the Pacific 
Northwestand the ground is expected to go on shaking for four to six minutes.  
In general, the intensity and destructiveness of the shaking will be greater the closer one is to the plate 
interface, with coastal areas experiencing the highest intensities and the level of shaking diminishing 
the farther inland one goes. Distance, however, is not the only factor: local geologic conditions, 
including soil type, can increase or decrease the intensity of the shaking and produce a range of 
secondary effects, including landslides and liquefaction (the latter occurs when certain types of soil 
lose cohesion and behave like a liquid). As a result, shaking intensities will vary throughout the Pacific 
Northwest, and some areas will suffer more damage than others. The initial quake will likely be 
followed by aftershocks, which may begin within hours of the main shock and will continue to occur for 
months afterwards.    
HOW INTENSE IS THE SHAKING?  
Magnitude is a measure of an 
earthquakes size: it tells how 
much energy was released when 
the fault ruptured. For the people 
and structures experiencing the 
earthquake, the intensity of the 
shaking is what really matters.  
How much the ground shakes 
depends on your location. 
Proximity is a major factor (the 
closer you are to the rupture, the 
more intense the shaking tends to 
be), but the shape and consistency 
of the ground makes a big 
difference. In the 2001 Nisqually 
earthquake, for example, the 
greatest shaking intensities were 
not nearest the rupture, but in 
areas where the soft soils of river 
valleys and artificial fill amplified 
seismic waves, such as on Harbor 
Island in Seattle.  
This map was created by the U.S. 
Geological Survey to show the 
shaking intensities that have been 
estimated for a scenario Cascadia 
earthquake measuring M9.0. The 
extent of the fault rupture is out-
lined in black. Areas colored red 
and orange will likely experience 
the strongest shaking (see the key 
at right for details). 
Cascadia, 6 
 
A Tsunami is Born Image Source: NASA Earth Observatory
When the Cascadia subduction zone 
ruptures, it causes part of the seafloor to 
move abruptly upwards. This displaces the 
column of water above the rupture, and the 
result is a tsunami: a series of waves that 
travel outwards in all directions from the 
place where the uplift occurred. Unlike  
wind-generated waves that travel along the 
surface, tsunami waves move through the 
entire body of water from seafloor to 
surface. Tsunami waves have extremely long 
wave lengths and contain a much greater 
volume of water than surface waves: this 
means that they look and act less like an 
ordinary wave and more like a vast, moving 
plateau of water.  
A tsunami can travel across the deep ocean 
at nearly 500 miles (800 km) per hour. In 
deep water, the amplitude or height of the 
tsunami is low relative to its length, so the 
slope of the waves is very low, and they may 
pass unnoticed under ships. Upon entering 
shallower water, however, they slow down 
The top photo shows the Kitakami River in Japan before 
and gain in height as water piles up behind the Tohoku earthquake on March 11, 2011. The tsunami 
the wave front. Once it hits shore, a single that followed traveled far up the river; large areas were 
tsunami wave can take as much as an hour still underwater when the bottom photo was taken on 
to finish flowing in. The height of the wave March 14. (Photos are false-color composites of infrared 
images in which healthy vegetation appears bright red.)  
and how far inland it travels will vary with 
location: In places along Cascadias coast, the tsunami may be as high as 3040 feet (912 m). Much 
depends on the local topographythe lay of the landboth underwater and along the shore. In 
general, the inundation will be greater where the land is low or the topography focuses the waves, 
such as at bays and river mouths. Other key factors are subsidence and tides: When the fault ruptures, 
the land in many coastal areas will drop in elevation, increasing the run-up of the subsequent tsunami; 
and if the quake occurs during high tide, the tsunami will travel farther inland than it would at low tide.   
Because the Cascadia subduction zone is close to shore, the first wave will reach land soon after the 
earthquakewithin 20 to 30 minutes in some locations (perhaps as little as 15 minutes along parts of 
the northern Californian coast). We can then expect multiple waves over a period of hours. In Japan, 
for example, the tsunami caused by the M9.0 Tohoku earthquake in 2011 produced as many as five 
large waves in some places, the last arriving more than two hours after the earthquake. The tsunami 
that struck Chile after the M8.8 Maule earthquake in 2010 consisted of three to four wavesthe last 
tended to be the largest and reached shore as many as four hours after the earthquake. In addition, 
because parts of our coastline will have dropped (subsided) during the earthquake, some areas may 
remain flooded, or will continue to flood during high tide, even after the tsunami retreats.   
Cascadia, 7 
 
SLOW EARTHQUAKES: In 2003, scientists in What Are the Odds?  
Canada detected the occurrence of regular, The evidence for past earthquakes of magnitude 9.0 
slow earthquakes along the Cascadia sub-
duction zone. Called episodic tremor and suggests that they recur on average every 500 years, but 
slip, these events are believed to originate the actual intervals between events are far from 
along the plate interface at depths below predictablesuch earthquakes have been separated by 
the locked zone. About 1528 miles (2545 as many as 1,000 years and as few as 200. The estimates 
km) down, warmer temperatures make the 
plates pliable enough to permit some of the sizes of pre-1700 earthquakes are also uncertain. 
movement. This occurs about every 1415 Cascadia has now been building up strain for over 300 
months in northern Washington and years, so the next great earthquake could happen at any 
slightly more or less frequently elsewhere: 
The periods of deep slip last for several time. Reduced to simple odds, the chances that an 
weeks and produce tremors that are too earthquake as large as magnitude 9.0 will occur along the 
small to be felt (in other words, low-level zone within the next 50 years are about one in ten.  
seismic wave chattering).  
Unfortunately, such movement increases, While the timing cannot be forecast very precisely, great 
rather than releases, the pressure on subduction zone earthquakes are inevitablethey are a 
Cascadias locked zone. Slow stick-slip 
cycles are now closely monitored, and they fundamental consequence of plate tectonics. Whether 
are providing clues that may help scientists this type of earthquake is considered alone or in 
predict when and where the locked zone combination with other earthquake sources, the odds 
itself is likely to break. Maps of slow-slip 
episodes can also reveal where the plate that a large, damaging earthquake will occur in the near 
interface is locked, defining previously future are very high. The more steps our communities 
unknown boundaries of future ruptures. take now to prepare, the more resilient we will be. 
 
PREDICTING THE EFFEC TS OF THE NEXT BIG EARTHQUAKE 
SLOW EARTHQUAKES: In 2003, scientists in 
No one can Canada detected the occurrence of regular, predict the exact date of the next Cascadia earthquake, but it is possible to anticipate the 
likely slow eartimpacthquakes along the Cascadia s on the regions communities, infrastructure, and economy. Due to the number of 
variables, subduction zone. Called earthquake simulations episodic tremor and do not provide precise forecasts of every effect in every location, but 
slip, these events are believed to originate 
they candirectly below the zone where the tectonic  provide useful insights. The results may help individuals, organizations, businesses, and 
communities plates are locked. About 15define their risks, 28 miles (25pinpoint their chief vulnerabilities, and make informed decisions as 
they 45 km) down, warmer temperatures make develop emergency and continuity plans and invest in seismic mitigation strategies. The earth-
the plates just pliable enough to permit 
quake some movement. This occurs itself cannot be averted, aboutbut, with awareness and planning, every  many of the damaging impacts can.   
1415 months: the periods of deep slip last 
If the Earthquake Happens Tomorrow....for several weeks and produce tremors that  
Thare too small to be felt. e Cascadia subduction zone  could produce an earthquake as large as the magnitude 9.0 event that 
devastated the east coast of Japan in 2011Unfortunately, such movement increases, . Fortunately, Cascadias earthquake is not expected to 
rather than releases, the pressure on 
cause as many deaths or destroy as much Cascadias locked zone. Slow stick-slip infrastructure. In large part, this is because fewer people live 
along the coast of the cycles are now closely monitored, and Pacific Northwest, and it has far less infrastructure. Moreover, the majority of 
the scientists hope they will provide clues that fatalities in recent subduction zone earthquakes elsewhere were caused by tsunami waves. 
Potentialmay help predict when the locked zone 
itself is likely to break.    fatalities along Cascadias coast  can be reduced if people in the tsunami zone are educated 
about  the hazard and prepared to evacuate to higher ground.  
This is not to say the Northwest would suffer only minor losses. Should the earthquake and tsunami 
happen tomorrow, the number of deaths could exceed 10,000. More than 30,000 people could be 
injured. The economic impacts would also be significant: for Washington, Oregon, and California, the 
losses have been estimated at upwards of $70 billion. While this is not as high as Japans staggering 
$309 billion in estimated losses, the potential consequences of a great Cascadia quake are sobering. 
Cascadia, 8 
 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF A CASCADIA SUBDUCTION ZONE EA R T H Q U A K E 
Cascadia M9.0: Washington Cascadia M9.0: Oregon only Post-earthquake loss estimate for the 
EARTHQUAKE SCENARIO: only (FEMA, 2011) (Oregon Resilience Plan, Nisqually M6.8 earthquake in 2001  
2013) 
ESTIMATED IMPACT: $49 billion $32 billion $24 billion 
ESTIMATING LOSSES: Earthquake modeling seeks to anticipate the earthquakes effects, including economic 
impacts (both direct and indirect). This table shows two estimates based on a Cascadia M9.0 earthquake 
scenario; for comparison, the estimated economic losses for the Nisqually earthquake are also included. 
Loss estimates may vary as a result of differences between the models and assumptions that were used to 
calculate them. While the numbers are necessarily inexact, such estimates provide useful insights to those 
seeking to assess risk and find cost-effective ways to mitigate it. 
Aftershocks 
The Cascadia earthquake is likely to be followed by aftershocks, which will occur throughout the region 
and vary in size: After a main shock as large as magnitude 9.0, a few aftershocks are likely to exceed 
magnitude 7.0. During the first month after the Maule earthquake in 2010, Chile experienced 19 after-
shocks larger than magnitude 6.0 (the largest was magnitude 6.9). Japans great Tohoku earthquake in 
2011 was preceded by a magnitude 7.5 foreshock and followed by multiple aftershocks, the largest of 
which measured magnitude 7.9. Some of these aftershocks occurred on the west side of Honshu, 
demonstrating that such quakes may be triggered some distance from the main shock.  
Aftershocks that follow hard on the heels of the main shock can bring down already weakened 
buildings. While the size and frequency of aftershocks will diminish over time, a few may cause 
additional damage long after the initial quake. This occurred in New Zealand, where the magnitude 7.0 
Darfield earthquake in September of 2010 
was followed over five months later by a 
magnitude 6.1 aftershock, which caused far 
more damage to the city of Christchurch 
than the main shock.  
The following pages describe possible 
impacts based on modeling of a magnitude 
9.0 main quake; large aftershocks would be 
likely to produce additional damage along 
the same lines. 
MULTITUDE OF AFTERSHOCKS: Chiles M8.8 Maule 
earthquake in 2010 occurred on a sub-
duction zone similar to Cascadia. On this 
map, green dots mark aftershocks that 
followed the Maule quake; red dots mark 
past earthquakes greater than M7.0 (1900 
to 2002). Earthquakes larger than M7.0 are 
rarer in Cascadia than in Chile, but a great 
quake on the Cascadia subduction zone is Image Source: USGS
expected to trigger multiple aftershocks
including some far from the faulted area of 
the main shock. (On the map, a solid white 
line encircles the section of the plate 
interface that broke in the Maule quake;  
white cross-hatching marks past ruptures.) 
Cascadia, 9 
 
How Will Essential Infrastructure Perform? 
Because Cascadias earthquake potential has only come to light over the last few decades, most of our 
communities and much of the infrastructure that supports them were built without taking this seismic 
hazard into account. This means that unless structures are newly built or have been retrofitted (or, in 
particular cases, relocated), they are likely to be vulnerable. We have only just begun to take steps to 
rectify this, so if the earthquake happens tomorrow, many of the impacts could be severe. The good 
news is that earthquake modeling is helping to focus efforts to create a better outcome. The following 
description offers a snapshot of a few of the anticipated impacts. 
Transportation Networks: Bridges, Roads, and Rail Lines 
As the ground goes on shaking for several minutes, numerous roads and bridges will suffer damage, 
especially along the coast (for example, U.S. Highway 101) and routes connecting the coast to areas 
farther inland. This vulnerability is in part due to the age of many bridges: For example, noting that the 
majority of bridges along Interstate 5 in Oregon were constructed before the development of modern 
seismic design standards, the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) has estimated that 19 of 
the bridges on this route are likely to be heavily damaged during a great subduction zone earthquake, 
and five are likely to collapse. Of the 135 
 
bridges carrying U.S. 101 on the Oregon 
coast, ODOT estimates that 56 may 
collapse and 42 may be heavily damaged.  
Terrain is another key factor. Many 
roads, bridges, and rail lines were built 
across old landslides that are likely to be 
set in motion by the earthquake. Bridges, 
by necessity, are often built across rivers, 
 Geotechnical Extreme Events Reconnaissance (GEER)and their foundations are set in alluvial 
soils that may lose stability as the ground 
Photo Source:shakes. During the Maule earthquake in 
Chile, all of the bridges spanning the Bio-
Bio River sustained damage when the 
ground they were built on liquefied and 
Wspread laterally.  
HEN SOIL ACTS LIKE A LIQUID:  
Liquefaction is one of the most damaging effects of ground Little redundancy has been built into the 
shaking. Certain soils, such as water-saturated silt and sand, 
can become dangerously unstable during an earthquake. transportation system, in part because of 
The shaking increases water pressure, forcing the water to the Pacific Northwests steep mountain 
move in between the individual grains of soil; as the grains ranges and inland waterways (notably, 
lose contact with each other, the soil begins to act like a the Columbia River, Puget Sound, and 
liquid. Overlying layers of sediment can slump and spread 
laterally. Structures built on such soils may shift position or straits around Vancouver Island). It may 
sink, while buried pipes and tanks become buoyant and therefore be hard to find detours around 
float to the surface. Liquefaction-prone soils are common in many of the damaged sections. Coastal 
river valleys, along waterfronts, and in places covered with communities are likely to be cut off from 
artificial fill. Unfortunately, these sites are often prime 
locations for important structures, including bridges, ports, each other and from inland areas. Even 
airports, and industrial facilities.  some inland areas may become isolated, 
Above: Damage due to liquefaction and lateral spreading at such as the island communities in and 
the Port of Coronel in Chile after the M8.8 Maule quake.  around Seattle that depend on bridges 
 Cascadia, 10 
 
 
WHEN SOIL ACTS LIKE A LIQUID:  
and ferries. In British Columbia, Highway 99 between Vancouver and communities to the south may 
become impassable in places. Rail service, such as that along the Interstate 5 corridor, is expected to 
be disrupted by landslides and damage to rail bridges that pass through Portland, Olympia, and Seattle.   
Ports and Shipping Channels 
While many coastal ports will be flooded by the tsunami, the large ports at Portland, Seattle, Tacoma, 
and Vancouver (B.C.) are, fortunately, not in the tsunami inundation zone. However, these and other 
ports are likely to experience severe currents, which can damage ships and piers within harbors. The 
tsunami triggered by Chiles Maule earthquake in 2010 caused currents that inflicted more than $1 
million in damage to Crescent City, California. Moreover, the Northwests inland ports may be 
damaged by the Cascadia quake itself: Ports tend to be vulnerable to earthquakes because the ground 
around and beneath natural waterways often consists of water-saturated soils that become unstable 
when shaken. In the Maule earthquake, the inland ports of Valparaso and Concepcin were damaged 
by strong ground shaking and liquefaction, rather than by the tsunami that followed the quake.  
Shipping channels may also be disrupted by a Cascadia earthquake. Sections of the Columbia and lower 
Willamette rivers, for instance, are likely to be closed to shipping due to underwater landslides and the 
presence of debris where ground failures have caused parts of structures, such as bridges and electrical 
transmission towers and lines, to topple into the river.  
Airports 
The runways and facilities of airports along the coast may be damaged extensively or completely by 
liquefaction-induced deformation and heaving, ground settlement, and tsunami impacts. The runways 
of these airports are likely to be unusable by fixed-wing aircraft after the earthquake, although 
helicopters may still be able to use some of the airfields to support relief efforts. Farther inland, 
airports along the I-5 corridor (including Seattle/Tacoma International Airport and Portland 
International Airport) are expected to experience only slight to moderate damage. These airports may, 
however, experience fuel shortages due to disruption of the jet fuel that is delivered by pipeline.   
Electricity, Natural Gas, and Liquid Fuel  
Widespread power outages are expected throughout the Pacific Northwest, with partial blackouts in 
every city located within 100 miles of the coast in Washington and Oregon and in parts of 
northwestern California. Natural gas pipelines 
and compressor stations are also likely to LLoonngg  lliinneess  aatt  ggaass  
sustain damage, leaving customers in western ssttaattiioonnss  wweerree  aa  
ffaammiilliiaarr  ssiigghhtt  iinn  
parts of Washington and Oregon without NNeeww  YYoorrkk  aanndd  NNeeww  
service. Restoration times for electricity and JJeerrsseeyy  aafftteerr  ddaammaaggee  
natural gas will depend on locationit may be ccaauusseedd  bbyy  
a matter of days in some inland areas, but a HHuurrrriiccaannee  SSaannddyy  
lleedd  ttoo  ppoowweerr  
matter of weeks or months nearer the coast.  oouuttaaggeess,,  ffuueell  
sshhoorrttaaggeess,,  aanndd  
Many of the regions refined fuel terminals rraattiioonniinngg..  
and numerous pump stations along the pipe-
Photo by Jim Henderson
line system in Washington and Oregon are 
expected to suffer damage; and ground 
displacement may cause numerous breaks and 
leaks in both crude- and refined-product 
pipelines that run north-south in the western  
Cascadia, 11 
 
zones of these states. Because of damage to shipping channels, it may not be possible to transport 
petroleum by boat from the refineries in Puget Sound to Portland and other points along the Columbia 
and Snake rivers. Without the ability to store and distribute liquid fuels locally, shortages are likely, 
affecting not only the use of vehicles and aircraft, but also critical facilities and key industries.  
As with other structures, the vulnerability of the regions energy infrastructure is variable. For example, 
Oregons critical energy infrastructure hub is in the Willamette River valley in an area where the 
ground consists of layers of river sediments and man-made fill. Until the older structures are 
retrofitted or rebuilt and the ground beneath them is treated, this hub is judged to be very vulnerable 
and may incur extensive damage during a Cascadia earthquake.  
Water Systems 
Modeling shows that the supply of drinking water is very likely to be interrupted as a result of earth-
quake damage. As with other utilities, the time it takes to restore some level of functionality will 
depend on location: Estimates range from three weeks to seven months, and perhaps much longer in 
areas near the coast. Complete restoration of some damaged systems could take several years. 
Disruption of water systems is especially problematic because broken natural gas connections and 
fallen power lines frequently start fires in the aftermath of big earthquakes. In the 1989 Loma Prieta 
earthquake, for instance, fire broke out in San Franciscos Marina District after liquefaction caused 
underground gas lines to fail. Typically, the same water system that supplies drinking water is used by 
firefighters to put out fires, so quake damage to the system will seriously hamper their efforts.  
Communications 
Earthquake damage often impairs communication systems just when they are most needed. In Chiles 
Maule earthquake in 2010, landline and wireless services were disrupted for as much as a week by 
equipment failures, structural damage to key facilities, and power outages. Jamming is another typical 
problem, as demonstrated in two recent earthquakes in California: after a magnitude 5.5. quake in 
Chino Hills (2008) and a magnitude 7.2 event in Baja (2010), landline and cell communications were 
overwhelmed by the number of people trying to use them at the same time. In a great Cascadia 
earthquake, millions of customers could lose service as a result of broken cables and equipment 
failures at telecommunications centers. The earthquake may damage cell towers, throw antennae out 
of alignment, and break fiber connecting cables, thereby disrupting service to many cellular customers 
as well. It is likely that the earthquake will sever major undersea transpacific cables, disrupting service 
FIRE: Damaging earthquakes often start 
fires, as was famously illustrated by the 
 great San Francisco earthquake and fire in 
ick1906 (left). Typical causes of fire are 
downed electrical lines and broken 
natural gas pipelines. Mitigation, such as 
fitting natural gas pipelines with auto-
matic or remote shut-off valves and 
installing flexible connections, can 
substantially reduce the risk.    
The City of Vancouver in British Columbia 
has also prepared for this hazard by 
installing a dedicated fire protection 
system. Completed in 2003, this quake-
resistant system allows firefighters to 
ource: National Archives and Records Administration, H.D. Chadwpump water from False Creek and Coal 
Photo SHarbour. 
Cascadia, 12 
 
not only to East Asia, but also cutting Alaska off from the rest of Photo by Eric Stahung, Seattle Municipal Archives 
the United States. It could take two to three months to restore 
these important connections.  
Interdependence and Recovery of Infrastructure 
Many parts of the regions infrastructure connect to and depend 
on others. Landslides and damaged bridges, for example, can 
prevent repair crews from reaching downed power lines or 
damaged sections of the water system. If the electricity is out for 
an extended period, communications systems that are 
functioning on back-up power will begin to fail, as will operations  
at water-treatment plants and hospitals that are relying on 
generators. Even with a functioning transportation system, it 
may be hard to refuel generators and vehicles if damaged 
pipelines and terminals lead to fuel shortages. By identifying 
vulnerabilities and critical interconnections, states and 
communities can prioritize mitigation and plan more effectively.   
What Will Happen to Buildings?   
As with other types of structures, a buildings performance 
during the earthquake will depend on when it was built, where it 
is located, what it is made of, and how long the ground shakes. DANGEROUS BUILDINGS: Unreinforced 
For tall buildings, large-magnitude earthquakes pose a particular masonry buildings (URMs) are 
challenge: High-rises and other tall structures vibrate at a lower notoriously dangerous in earth-
frequency than shorter buildings. Because the frequency of a quakes. They can be found through-
out the Northwest and include 
large earthquakes seismic waves is also low, some tall structures schools, courthouses, city halls, and 
may resonate with the waves. This will amplify the intensity of apartment buildings; many are 
the shaking and may increase the damage.  considered historic. The M6.8 
Nisqually earthquake in 2001 lasted 
Some buildings should hold up fairly well. Structures that were for under a minute, but caused 
serious damage to URMs; it even 
designed and built to meet current seismic codes may sustain cracked the dome of Washingtons 
damage, but should not collapse and may be usable after the capitol building and damaged its 
earthquake, although they may lack utilities. Many houses in the supporting columns.  
Northwest are wood-frame structures. This type of building is California has had legislation in 
lightweight, flexible, and unlikely to collapse during the quake, place since 1986 that requires 
although it may shift off of its foundation if not bolted to it (this jurisdictions in seismic zones to 
adopt programs aimed at 
is a major concern for houses built prior to 1976). Connections to accelerating the retrofitting or 
utilities may also break, and fallen chimneys are quite common, demolition of URMs. The City of 
as was seen during the Nisqually earthquake in 2001.  Eureka, for instance, has had such a 
program in place since 1989: The 
Other buildings will perform very badly indeed. Unreinforced majority of the URMs identified as 
hazardous under Eurekas program 
masonry buildings (URMs), for example, predate seismic codes. have now been retrofitted. Similar 
Built of brick or concrete without steel reinforcement, they are programs are being contemplated in 
prone to collapse during strong earthquakes, particularly when other states. 
the shaking lasts for several minutes. URMs are often the cause Above: The front of the historic 
of earthquake-related fatalities. Because of the danger such Cadillac Hotel building in Seattle 
buildings pose, some governments are taking steps to eliminate partially collapsed during the 2001 
Nisqually earthquake. 
Cascadia, 13  
 
or strengthen URMs. California state law requires local governments in seismic hazard zones to 
inventory URMs and adopt mitigation programs aimed at reducing the risk of collapse. Complete 
inventories have been done only in California, but URMs are common throughout the Northwest: 
Oregon has an estimated 5,000 to 10,000 statewide, with about 1,800 in the city of Portland alone. 
Seattle, which has about 1,000 URMs and has experienced three damaging earthquakes in the last 64 
years, is considering adoption of a mandatory retrofit program similar to Californias.   
 Nonstructural Damage 
A Cascadia earthquake may cause nonstructural damage even 
in buildings that were built or retrofitted to meet a higher 
structural seismic standard. Strong shaking can knock fittings 
and equipment loose and move anything that is not securely 
bolted down. Suspended ceilings, fire sprinkler systems, 
elevators, partition walls, air handling units, and hot water 
tanks are just a few of the vulnerable components. Non-
Photo by Ross Becker, CERA photo gallerystructural damage was widespread in Chiles magnitude 8.8 
quake in 2010 and affected every type of building. Damage to 
medical, mechanical, and electrical equipment can put even 
structurally sound healthcare facilities out of service: In Chile, 
some 83 percent of hospitals were rendered partially or totally 
non-functional as a result of this type of damage. Nonstructural 
damage also caused losses at industrial facilities in Chile and 
increased their downtime. People can prevent a lot of this 
Many businesses lost inventory in the damage by taking steps to secure furnishings, inventory, and 
M6.1 quake that struck Christchurch, 
New Zealand in February of 2011.  equipment and by retrofitting nonstructural components. 
ARE CRITICAL FACILITIES READY? Making sure critical facilities are able to survive the quake and function 
afterwards is a top priority. For example, many older fire stations must be retrofitted to make sure quake 
damage does not prevent firefighters from getting the engines out. Healthcare facilities also need to be built 
to current standards or retrofitted, but as Chiles M8.8 earthquake in 2010 showed, preparations must go 
beyond reinforcing the buildings structure: Hospitals in Chile had emergency generators and supplies of 
water, but lacked backups for communication systems. This made it difficult for them to coordinate aid.  
Modeling of a Cascadia M9.0 
quake predicts wide spread  
damage to critical facilities in 
coastal zones and many 
western areas. Timeframes 
for restoration range from 
months to years where 
shaking intensities are high; 
it may be three years or 
more for parts of the coast.   
Many of Seattles fire stations 
were built between 1918 and 
1974, so the city has begun a 
 program of seismic up-
grading and replacement. 
Station 10 (left) is a new 
building and was designed to 
meet seismic standards. 
Photo by Joe Mabel
Cascadia, 14 
 
Onagawa, Ishinomaki 
(right), is one of many 
coastal communities 
in Japan devastated 
by the near-source 
tsunami that was 
triggered by the M9.0 
Tohoku earthquake 
on March 11, 2011.  
(Photo Source: NOAA/ NGDC, 
Shunichi Koshimura) 
What Will Happen to Communities on the Coast? 
After enduring several minutes of strong shaking, many of the Northwests coastal communities will 
face a near-source tsunami. Communities most at risk are those along the outer Pacific Coast and Strait 
of Juan de Fuca. Everyone in the tsunami inundation zone must evacuate immediately in order to reach 
higher ground before the first wave reaches the shore, which in some areas could be 20 minutes or 
less. While the coast is not heavily developed or densely populated, over 71,000 people are estimated 
to live in the tsunami inundation zones of Washington, Oregon, and northern California (Del Norte, 
Humboldt, and Mendocino counties). This number does not include the people who work in thousands 
of businesses in the zone, or the many thousands of visitors who rent houses, stay in hotels, or camp 
there. During peak seasons, the number of visitors far exceeds the number of residents. 
Evacuation is more challenging for some communities than others. In northern California and southern 
Oregon, where the subduction zone is closest to shore, the evacuation time may be as short as 1520 
minutes. The proportion of a community within the tsunami inundation zone and the distance to high 
ground are also critical factors. For 
example, in Washington, 70 percent of 
Aberdeens population and 100 percent of 
 the population of Ocean Shores live in the 
inundation zone. Most people in Aberdeen 
should be able to walk to high ground 
before the tsunami reaches shore, but the 
majority of Ocean Shores residents may be 
too far from high ground to reach it in the 
time available. Given limited routes away 
from the coast and expected damage to 
roads and bridges, attempts to evacuate by 
car are likely to result in gridlock.    
Aerial view of the city of Aberdeen on the outer 
coast of Washington. The tsunami hazard zone 
is shaded in yellow. Highways are marked by 
Image Source: Washington State Department of Natural Resourcessolid red lines.  
Cascadia, 15 
 
Because the shape of the seafloor and shoreline can focus and amplify the tsunami in some places, 
wave heights will vary: In parts of northern California, the height of the tsunami could exceed 26 feet 
(8 m). At Ocean Shores in Washington, modeled tsunami heights in one scenario reached 1620 feet 
(56 m), while at Long Beach, they ranged between 23 and 26 feet (78 m). Wood-frame houses, 
although likely to survive the earthquake, are unlikely to withstand the impact of so much water, which 
will pick up large debris as it flows inland. These tsunami heights are also sufficient to flood the second 
and third stories of steel and reinforced concrete buildings. As the experience of Japan and Chile 
showed, even reinforced concrete buildings may be damaged by debris impact or scouring around 
their foundations. On the whole, however, reinforced concrete tends to hold up well and, if sufficiently 
tall, such buildings could serve as vertical evacuation refuges for those unable to reach high ground.  
Cities and towns that are likely to be particularly hard hit by the tsunami include Eureka and Crescent 
City in California, Seaside and Warrenton in Oregon, coastal communities between Moclips and the 
Columbia River in Washington, and Port Alberni in British Columbia. Tsunami damage is also likely to 
be severe enough at the mouth of the Columbia River to impair navigation and prevent normal 
transport of goods, such as agricultural products, between inland areas and the coast. Cascadias 
topography, however, makes the region as a whole far less vulnerable to tsunami than is the northeast 
coast of Japan. There, tsunami waves generated during the 2011 Tohoku earthquake ranged between 
33 and 132.5 feet (1040 m) in height and devastated that coasts many low-lying areas. Moreover, the 
Pacific Northwests largest population centers and ports, including Portland (OR), Seattle and Tacoma 
(WA), and Vancouver (BC), are not expected to experience any significant tsunami impacts. 
Earthquake and Tsunami Refugees 
The great earthquake and tsunami that struck Japan in 2011 spotlighted the challenge of providing 
temporary shelter, services, and food to large numbers of displaced people. If, like the Tohoku event, 
the Cascadia earthquake happens during the winter or early spring, many people will need refuge from 
the cold, wet conditions, and generators, fuel, and other emergency supplies will be in high demand. If 
the earthquake occurs during the summer, the number of visitors that seasonally swell the population 
of seaside towns and campgrounds will increase the need for shelter and supplies in coastal areas.  
The need for shelter will be greatest 
near the tsunami hazard zones where 
evacuees are gathered, but earth-
quake damage is also likely to 
displace people farther inland. 
Ideally, people living in relatively un-
damaged buildings could shelter in 
place, but because many will be 
without electricity, running water, 
and other utilities, they will need 
supplies of water and access to 
 
portable facilities until their services 
are restored. If the earthquake 
occurs in winter, many will be 
The American Red Cross delivered meals-on-wheels to those 
 FEMA, Walt Jenningswithout heat, and even those with 
who could not reach a food source or were unable to cook, 
portable generators may find it hard 
 Source: after Hurricane Sandy caused widespread damage along the 
northeast coast of the U.S. in the fall of 2012.to obtain fuel. Among the most 
Photo 
Cascadia, 16 
 
  
vulnerable are low-income individuals and families who may lack the resources to store emergency 
supplies, repair homes, replace belongings, or support themselves during a lengthy recovery.   
lliams, Cascadia GeoSciencesOther Far-Reaching Impacts of a Cascadia Earthquake and Tsunami 
Because the intensity of the shaking tends to diminish farther from the rupturing fault, eastern parts of 
British Columbia, Washington, Oregon, and northern California will be less affected than the coast and 
western river valleys and basins, although damage may still occur in places where layers of soft soil 
amplify the seismic waves. The earthquake could also produce a range hydrogeologic impacts, such as 
Image source: NOAA/NGDC, Todd Williams, Cascadia GeoSciences Image source: NOAA/NGDC, Todd Wicausing some wells to go dry or degrading the quality of well or surface water. 
The more significant impacts in eastern 
regions will be indirect. Eastern cities and 
airports, such as Redmond, Oregon, and Photo
Spokane and Moses Lake, Washington, may  Source: NOAA/NGDC, Todd Williams, Cascadia GeoSciences
become staging areas for emergency 
resources and personnel. Hospitals in 
western zones are likely to be damaged or 
overwhelmed by the number of injured, so 
patients may be evacuated to other hospitals 
as soon as transportation is available. Large 
companies and government agencies in the 
damage zone may also temporarily transfer Ocean-crossing tsunami waves from Japans M9.0 
administrative functions to backup facilities earthquake in 2011 damaged distant harbors and 
ports, including Crescent City, California. 
on the east side or elsewhere.   
Eastern areas will also be affected economically by damage to western roads and bridges, ports, and 
the Columbia River navigation system, which will prevent the normal movement of goods, including 
the export of agricultural products. Disruption of the fuel distribution system may cause shortages in 
some inland areas, such as southeastern Washington. Because the regions economy is interconnected, 
less damaged eastern areas are also likely to be affected by economic changes on the west side, 
including the loss of numerous small businesses in quake-damaged areas, the possible exodus of some 
large businesses out of the region, and the decline in tourism, particularly along the coast.  
Farther afield, the earthquake is expected to sever major undersea transpacific cables, which would 
substantially disrupt communications between the United States and East Asian countries. Rerouting 
communications traffic around the affected area may produce delays and disruption elsewhere in the 
United States, because the additional traffic could exceed the capacity of the network. Undersea cables 
also constitute Alaskas main communications link with the rest of the United States. Among other 
things, the loss of this link may disrupt normal banking activity in Alaska, preventing many people there 
from accessing funds and interrupting the direct deposit services of some out-of-state companies.    
Another far-reaching impact will be the tsunami that travels across the Pacific, affecting coastal 
communities as far away as Japan. Fortunately, the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center in Hawaii and the 
West Coast/Alaska Tsunami Warning Center in Alaska are able to track ocean-crossing tsunamis and 
issue timely warnings. Thanks to such warnings, places as near as Alaska will have more than four 
hours to evacuate. Wave heights will be smaller farther from the subduction zone, but may still cause 
flooding and strong currents that can damage shorelines, ports, and propertymuch as the tsunami 
from the 2011 Tohoku earthquake sank several boats and damaged docks in Crescent City, California.  
Cascadia, 17 
 
PREPARING FOR THE BIG ONE 
As the foregoing description of possible impacts shows, the next big Cascadia earthquake is likely to 
have serious consequences, both within the region and beyond. Much still needs to be done to prepare 
the people and communities of the Pacific Northwest for this event. Nevertheless, progress has already 
been made toward identifying and lessening these potential impacts and improving the regions ability 
to withstand and recover from a great subduction zone earthquake.  
Risk Assessment  
Cascadias earthquake hazardits potential for earthquakesis determined by the regions geology 
and the tectonic forces that continually shift and reshape the surface of the earth. Earthquakes may 
also trigger secondary hazards, such as liquefaction and landslides, tsunami waves, fires, and 
hazardous material spills. Identifying and analyzing the hazards makes it possible to assess the risk
the exposure and vulnerability of people, buildings, and infrastructure to the hazards.  
Image Source: Washington State Department of Natural Resources
This excerpt from a liquefaction 
susceptibility map of King County 
in Washington shows how such  
maps can help reveal the areas that 
are likely to experience greater 
damage during an earthquake.  
Identification of the regions geologic hazards is progressing, and maps now exist that help reveal and 
define these features, including active faults, liquefiable soils, existing landslides, and tsunami 
inundation zones. As this work continues, hazard maps and associated data are refined and updated. 
Such maps are used to support earthquake modeling and risk assessment, which can help everyone 
from community and emergency planners to transportation officials and engineers pinpoint 
vulnerabilities and develop practical strategies to minimize risk. For example, FEMAs Hazus 
methodology and software is a modeling tool that uses data from hazard mapping and other sources to 
estimate potential losses from earthquakes and other natural disasters. This tool has been used to 
assess potential impacts from a Cascadia megathrust earthquake in Oregon, Washington, and 
California, and is now being used in parts of British Columbia as well.    
Although scientists cannot predict earthquakes, they are using their growing understanding of how 
earthquakes work to hone their ability to estimate the probabilities: An earthquake relieves stored-up 
stresses, but it also perturbs the rocks and faults around it. This disturbance can trigger additional 
earthquakes (aftershocks being the most familiar). While an earthquake reduces the likelihood that 
Cascadia, 18 
 
another earthquake will occur on the fault that produced it, it actually raises the probability of 
earthquakes everywhere else. The probability of earthquakes smaller than the triggering earthquake 
can be significant (aftershocks).  Even a small earthquake makes a subsequent big earthquake more 
likely, although the increase in probability is generally small. Fortunately, the effects of these 
perturbations decrease over time, as does the elevated probability. Scientists now understand this 
process well enough to consider estimating probabilities that change with time, particularly in 
California, where earthquake rates and experience are highest. In the coming years, these time-
dependent forecasts will become routine following significant earthquakes nationwide. 
Raising Awareness 
The Cascadia Region Earthquake Workgroup (CREW) and emergency ARE YOU PREPARED?  
management and scientific agencies across Cascadia have been Individuals, families, and 
engaged for years in public education efforts aimed at raising businesses can improve 
awareness and encouraging individuals, families, and businesses to their own resilience by 
prepare for earthquakes and tsunamis. These efforts include taking steps to prepare 
coordinated drop, cover, and hold earthquake drills. Some coastal for earthquakes and 
communities have also held tsunami evacuation drills, giving other natural disasters: 
residents and visitors the opportunity to use evacuation maps and  Participate in drills: 
test-walk their routes to high ground. A number of national Drop, cover, and hold. 
programs also exist. In the U.S., for example, FEMA maintains a  Identify the hazards at 
website (www.ready.gov) as part of a campaign to educate the your home and place of 
public and help people prepare for emergencies, including earth-business. 
quakes. The National Weather Services TsunamiReadyTM program  Develop a response 
plan. 
helps communities on the coast plan and prepare for potential 
tsunamis. Information about earthquake preparedness is also  Maintain a disaster 
supply kit (sufficient to 
provided by the American Red Cross and by the U.S. Geological last 314 days). 
Surveys Earthquake Hazards Program, which monitors and reports 
earthquakes and assesses earthquake impacts and hazards. LEARN MORE AT CREW.ORG 
Resilience Planning and Mitigation Strategies 
The states of Washington and Oregon have completed resilient state plans. Inspired by San Franciscos 
Resilient City initiative, these efforts brought together experts and stakeholders to assess the current 
seismic vulnerability of a variety of key sectors, including critical and emergency services, 
transportation, utilities, communications, and finance and business. The initiatives identified state-
level priorities and produced frameworks and recommendations for increasing each states resilience 
over the next 50 years. While the initiatives focused on the earthquake hazard, many of the strategies 
and recommendations they produced would improve resilience in relation to other hazards as well.  
A number of organizations and state agencies have also undertaken sector-specific assessment, 
planning, and mitigation. The Oregon Department of Transportation, for example, recently completed 
an assessment and prioritization of Oregons lifeline corridors and produced recommendations for a 
strategic campaign to retrofit bridges and harden essential routes in seismic zones. The Washington 
State Department of Transportation began its retrofit program in 1991 and has retrofitted hundreds of 
bridges since then. British Columbias Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure is similarly engaged 
in building new and retrofitting old bridges to meet current seismic standards. Because of the great 
expense involved, programs such as these typically distribute the work over a period of many years, 
focusing first on priority routes in high-risk areas.  
Cascadia, 19 
 
 Engineering for Earthquakes 
Just as bridges can be built or retrofitted to 
withstand the forces of an earthquake, new 
buildings can be designed to meet basic life-
safety seismic standards or even remain 
sufficiently undamaged to be usable after 
the event. Seismic design and retrofitting is 
now well established and has been 
extensively tested in active seismic zones 
General Services Administration, Federal Judicial Centersuch as Japan, where international teams of 
 Source: engineers have been assessing how well 
Photoseismically designed and retrofitted 
buildings performed during the strong, 
prolonged shaking of the Tohoku earth-
Built in 1875, Pioneer Courthouse in Portland (OR) was quake in 2011. This event tested engineering 
rehabilitated in 2005. A seismic base isolation system techniques on an unprecedented scale. For 
was installed, which decouples the superstructure from 
the foundation during an earthquake: The foundation example, Japan has approximately 2,600 
absorbs most of the shaking.   commercial buildings and 3,800 homes that 
 were built or retrofitted using a technique 
known as seismic base isolation, which allows the foundation to absorb most of the earthquakes 
The Pioneer Courthouse in Portland (OR) was built in 
force1875. Rehabilitation of the building was comp. Many of these structures were shaken by leted in the magnitude 9.0 Tohoku quake; engineers who 
inspected them after2005 and included installation of a seismic base wards found that they performed very well, exhibiting no structural damage and 
remaining fully functionalisolation system, which decouples the superstructure . The U.S. currently has fewer than 100 base-isolated buildings. One of these 
is the from the foundation during an earthquake: the newly-retrofitted Pioneer Courthouse in Portland, Oregon.  
foundation absorbs most of the shaking.   
Base isolation is just one of many techniques that can now be used to improve the performance of 
buildings and other structures during an earthquake. While upgrading an older building to make it 
usable after an earthquake may be cost effective only in certain cases, upgrades that prevent collapse 
during an earthquakesuch as stabilizing parapets, securing exterior walls to roof and floor joists, and 
installing diagonal steel bracingare more affordable and can drastically improve safety. Because 
many schools in Cascadias seismic zones occupy buildings that predate modern seismic codes, Oregon, 
Washington, California, and British Columbia have allto varying degreessought to inventory school 
facilities and assess potential structural and nonstructural problems. Assessment, retrofitting, and 
replacement of these buildings proceeds as quickly as the available funding allows. For example, since 
2001, British Columbia has allocated $2.2 billion (CAD) to seismic mitigation of school buildings.   
THE LIMITS OF BUILDING CODES: Because Japan has a very long history of destructive earthquakes, it has had 
strict seismic standards in its building codes for a long time, and this effectively limited damage during the 
M9.0 Tohoku earthquake in 2011. By contrast, the development of seismic building standards in the Pacific 
Northwest is relatively recent and did not take the Cascadia subduction zone hazard into account until the 
early 1990s. This means that many older buildings were not designed or built to handle the ground 
shaking they are likely to experience during a large earthquake.   
Current standards for new buildings and major remodels in the regions seismic zones are intended to 
ensure that buildings will not collapse or injure people during an earthquake. This is a minimum standard 
and does not mean that a building will be undamaged and useable after the event. The ground on which a 
building stands is another factor affecting its performance in an earthquake. Although hazard mapping can 
indicate areas that are likely to liquefy or spread during an earthquake, and building sites can be evaluated 
for this potential, most of the Northwest is behind California in the development of grading ordinances.             
Cascadia, 20 
 
If the regions building stock is to become more resilient over time, all new buildings in Cascadias 
seismic zones must be designed and built to meet the seismic standards in contemporary building 
codes. This will only happen if local jurisdictions adopt and enforce the most current seismic codes. 
Earthquake Early Warning Systems 
By detecting the smaller seismic waves that precede the earthquakes destructive waves, an early 
warning system might provide a few seconds to a few minutes of warning to cities (such as Portland, 
Seattle, and Vancouver) that are some distance from the Cascadia subduction zone. This would give 
people time to drop, cover, and hold, and it could be enough time to shut off gas mains, open fire 
station doors, slow freeway traffic, and clear cars away from potentially dangerous structures (such as 
bridges and viaducts). The University of Washington, Caltech, and University of California, Berkeley, 
with support from the U.S. Geological Survey and the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, have 
begun development of an earthquake early warning system. Japan has already implemented such a 
system and used it to provide some warning of the Tohoku earthquake on March 11, 2011. While 
Japans experience suggests that early warning systems are promising, much still needs to be done to 
test the usefulness and appropriateness of such a system for the western coast of the United States.  
British Columbia is likewise in the process of developing an earthquake early warning system through 
the cooperation of the Ministry of Transportation, Natural Resources Canada, University of British 
Columbia, and Ocean Networks Canada. The project will use offshore sensors in the northern Cascadia 
subduction zone and land-based instruments throughout the province to deliver earthquake warnings.  
Preparing for Tsunamis  
The devastation caused by the Tohoku tsunami in Japan 
might lead one to conclude that a tsunami is one feature of 
a subduction zone event that no amount of preparation 
can addressbut such a conclusion is far from accurate. 
Mapping the Tsunami Inundation Zones 
From British Columbia to northern California, scientists and 
planners have been working to assess the tsunami hazard 
and identify the communities and infrastructure that are 
most at risk. For most of the coast, tsunami modeling and 
mapping began in the 1990s. The computer modeling takes 
into account not only a magnitude 9.1 earthquake and its 
effects (such as co-seismic subsidence), but also the shape 
of the undersea landscape and the topography of the 
coast. The modeling produces maps that show the parts of 
the coast that are likely to be in danger, as well as the 
zones that are likely to be beyond the tsunamis reach. 
While such modeling cannot portray the next Cascadia 
tsunami in precise detail, it does offer communities a 
useful tool to help inform local decisions about mitigation 
and future development, including the locations of schools 
and critical facilities. Emergency planners can use it to 
determine where to locate tsunami evacuation routes, 
assembly areas, and refuges.   
Cascadia, 21 
 
Lessons from Abroad  
Among the most important lessons to emerge from recent experience of tsunamis elsewhere is the 
importance of teaching people on the coast to evacuate as soon as the ground stops shaking. While 
official warning systems work well when the tsunami is generated by a distant earthquake, they proved 
far less effective during the recent near-shore events in Japan and Chile. Given the limited time for 
evacuation, the uncertainty of initial tsunami data, and the real possibility that local warning systems 
may suffer damage or lose power during the earthquake, many tsunami education materials now 
emphasize that people should treat the earthquake itself as the signal to evacuate to higher ground. 
Having evacuated, they should then stay out of the inundation zone until local officials announce that 
it is safe to return. 
Originally  Evacuation Routes and Signs 
designed  in  Emergency management and natural resource agencies in 
oregon  in  the  Cascadia have designated evacuation routes for inundation 
1990,,  the  symbol  zones and produced evacuation maps and brochures to 
oonn  Cascadia  
tsunami  signs  was  help inform local planning agencies and the public. The 
adopted      National Tsunami Hazard Mitigation Program published 
international  guidelines to help communities develop the maps and to 
symbol  in  2003..              encourage consistency between communities and regions.  
 Anyone can access these tsunami resources online. In 
addition, signs are now posted up and down the coast, 
informing people about the tsunami hazard and clearly 
marking tsunami evacuation routes.  
Vertical Evacuation and Other Strategies 
Attempts to evacuate the tsunami inundation zone by car are likely to result in gridlock, as traffic backs 
up and drivers encounter earthquake debris and damaged roads and bridges. People are therefore told 
to leave their cars and walk to high ground. Fortunately, for much of Cascadias coast, high ground is 
not far away. As part of the ongoing effort to assess and mitigate the vulnerability of coastal 
communities, recent studies have estimated how long it would take pedestrians walking at various 
speeds to leave the inundation zones of many coastal communities in Cascadia. Emergency planners 
and communities can use such evacuation modeling to determine where vertical evacuation refuges 
might be needed and where less expensive strategies could help people reach safety before the 
tsunami reaches the shore.  
For areas where high ground is too far away, vertical evacuation refuges may be an option. In Japans 
tsunami in 2011, vertical evacuation structures saved thousands of lives. Such structures can take a 
variety of formsbuildings, elevated platforms, or even artificial bermsbut should be constructed in 
accordance with FEMAs Guidelines for Design of Structures for Vertical Evacuation from Tsunamis 
(FEMA P646, Second Edition, 2012). Project Safe Haven in Washington is an example of a community-
driven vertical evacuation development effort aimed at identifying potential locations for vertical 
evacuation refuges and selecting designs and strategies that best suit the needs of the community.  
Other studies and mitigation efforts address the vulnerability of key transportation routes: The Oregon 
Department of Transportation, for example, has initiated a research program aimed at developing 
tsunami design criteria for bridges along U.S. Highway 101.    
Cascadia, 22 
 
Outreach and Education 
The tsunami that hit the coast of Chile after the Maule earthquake in 2010 demonstrated that a high 
level of tsunami awareness before the event will save lives. Most coastal residents knew that the 
earthquake was the natural warning to evacuate to high ground, and the number of people who died 
in this tsunami was greatly reduced as a result. Tsunami preparedness and education are well 
underway in Cascadia. In Washington, for instance, such efforts have been ongoing for more than a 
decade and include community education sessions, tsunami warning siren tests, and evacuation drills, 
in addition to the brochures, factsheets, videos, and other informational materials that are posted on 
the websites of emergency management and geological resource agencies throughout the Pacific 
Northwest. These education campaigns have been effective at raising awareness among the residents 
of coastal communities, although much remains to be done to increase their level of preparedness.   
Visitors are often among the most vulnerable during a tsunami, because they are less likely to know 
how to respond and where to go. In the tsunami that followed the Maule earthquake, campers 
accounted for a large proportion of the fatalities. While some of these were on an island that lacked 
high ground and could only be accessed by boat, others simply did not know what to do. 
LIVING IN CASCADIA 
If a magnitude 9.0 Cascadia earthquake and tsunami strike tomorrow, the impacts to the region are 
likely to be severe and the recovery lengthy. Cascadias communities will be transformed, but they will 
recover and rebuild. Every investment we now make in assessment, planning, and mitigation will pay 
dividends in the long run by shortening our recovery 
time, reducing our losses, and helping ensure that our 
Our understanding of 
communities emerge from the event just as vibrantbut 
Cascadias geology 
has evolved at a more resilientthan they were before.   
rapid pace, as has our 
ability to anticipate Next Steps Forward 
how future By implementing the recommendations that have 
earthquakes could already resulted from state and regional resilience 
impact the people planning and lifeline assessments, policy makers and 
who live here. We community leaders can address many of the existing 
 have also learned a vulnerabilities of Cascadias critical infrastructure. Local 
great deal from the jurisdictions can also ensure that the regions building 
experiences of stock becomes more earthquake resistant over time by 
countries such as adopting the most recent building codes. Continued 
Japan and Chile investment in earthquake research, including loss 
about how to estimation, engineering, and social science, is also 
prepare for a needed. Meanwhile, individuals, families, and businesses 
megathrust event, can raise their own level of preparedness and contribute 
mitigate risks to the resilience of their communities by learning more 
beforehand, and about the hazard, developing response plans, 
improve recovery maintaining emergency supply kits, and taking steps to 
afterwards.  reduce risks at their homes and places of business.  
Image Source: OSU Active Tectonics and Seafloor Mapping Lab 
 For a list of  resources and to learn more about how to prepare, visit CREW.ORG 
 
Our understanding Cascadia, 23 
 of Cascadias For a list of  resources and to learn more about how to prepare visit CREW.ORG 
geology has evolved 
at a rapid pace, as 
  
  
 
 
 

 
