
My Fellow Angelenos:
As Mayor, I have no greater responsibility than the public safety of Los Angeles. And here in our city, its not 
a question of if the so-called Big One will hit. Its a matter of when. So we cannot afford to be complacent. 
The known risks  to life, property and our overall economy  are too great.
Los Angeles has always been an epicenter of seismic risk. Now, the action steps in this report will make our 
city a nation-leading epicenter of seismic preparedness, resilience, and safety. 
This package of action steps represents a tectonic shift of how earthquake policy is made in Los Angeles. To 
this point, earthquake policy has more often than not been developed in the immediate aftermath of a major 
earthquake. And even then, momentum quickly died out, leaving grave vulnerabilities behind. Today, Los 
Angeles is addressing our greatest earthquake vulnerabilities proactively and strategically.  
I have set a clear agenda for my Administration  to get City Hall back to basics and to focus City 
government on our core responsibilities. Unfortunately, here in earthquake country, those responsibilities have 
been put to the wayside for far too long. Thats why I appointed renowned seismologist Dr. Lucy Jones as my 
Science . Through an unprecedented partnership with the U.S. Geological Survey, she 
has spent the last year studying our vulnerabilities; convening stakeholders and experts from academia, 
industry, business, government and our communities; and developing this action plan.
The outcome of this extensive process, which also incorporates cutting edge research and lessons learned 
from past earthquakes, is that we are focusing on three major sectors: fortifying our buildings, fortifying our 
water system and fortifying our telecommunications networks. Tied together, these actions will strengthen 
resilience in our city for decades to come. 
These action steps are designed to be best-in-class and achievable. This is not intended to simply be the 
latest blue ribbon commission report that sits on a shelf. Its designed so that government, property owners, 
and commercial and residential tenants can come together to strengthen Los Angeles against a known and 
major threat to life, property, and our economy. 
This report represents a full year of work by dozens of people under the leadership of Dr. Jones. It is with the 
deepest gratitude to them that I present .
Sincerely,Sincerely,
ERIC GARCETTI
Mayor
Executive Summary
Resilience by Design presents the recommendations of the Mayoral Seismic Safety Task Force, the members of which are 
listed in the Acknowledgements Section of this document.  These recommendations address the citys greatest 
vulnerabilities from earthquakes with significant and attainable solutions to:
 
 
  Protect the lives of our residents;
  Improve the capacity of the City to respond to earthquakes;
  Prepare the City to recover quickly from earthquakes; and
  Protect the economy of the City and all of Southern California.
The Mayoral Seismic Task Force evaluated four areas of seismic vulnerability, namely:
 
  Pre-1980 non-ductile reinforced concrete buildings
  Pre-1980 soft-first-story buildings
  Water system infrastructure (including impact on firefighting capability)
  Telecommunications infrastructure
Strengthen Our Buildings
The most obvious threat from earthquakes is physical damage to vulnerable buildings.  
Soft story and concrete buildings built before the implementation of Los Angeles 1976 
revision of the building code pose a significant risk to life in strong earthquake shaking.
Strengthen Our Buildings
Assess And Retrofit Pre-1980 Soft Story And Concrete Buildings
This report recommends that these buildings be assessed and retrofitted as necessary:
Soft Story
Soft story buildings are wood frame buildings where the first floor has large openings,  for example tuck-under parking, garage 
doors, and retail display windows. This Report recommends that building owners be required to, within one year of passage of the 
implementing legislation, submit to the City documentation establishing that an acceptable retrofit has already been conducted, or 
that a retrofit is required. It is further recommended that retrofitting be required so that first floors are strengthened to the same 
capacity as second floors within five years.
Concrete
Non-ductile reinforced concrete buildings (most concrete buildings built before the implementation of the 1976 code) are at higher 
risk of collapse, because some parts of the building such as columns and frame connectors are too brittle and break in strong 
shaking.  The weight of the concrete makes them particularly deadly when they fail.This Report recommends that building owners be 
required to, within five years of passage of the implementing legislation, submit to the City documentation establishing 
that an acceptable retrofit has already been conducted, or that a retrofit is required. It is further recommended that retrofitting be 
mandated within 25 years to either the Basic Safety Objective of the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) standard 41 
or to the equivalent standard if other approaches are approved.
Strengthen Our Buildings
Implement a Seismic Safety Rating System
Our building code is designed around a life-safety requirement that mandates construction that ensures a low 
probability of collapse in the worst earthquake. The code is not designed, however, to make it so buildings, while 
still standing, are also likely to remain usable after an earthquake. This report recommends a voluntary rating sys-
tem to encourage building owners to invest in the resilience of their buildings so that they not only stay standing 
after an earthquake, but so that they also remain functional.
Create a Back To Business Program
In the aftermath of a major earthquake, it is important that our business community is able to rebound as quickly 
as possible to minimize negative economic impacts and to provide residents access to important goods and 
services. Following a major earthquake, however, the Citys ability to certify buildings as safe for use will be 
hampered by city services being focused on emergency response and by high demand on our cadre of building 
inspectors. Deploying inspectors from outside of the city through mutual aid agreements is time consuming.
This report recommends that the City develop a Back to Business program to rapidly supplement the capacity of 
the citys building inspection force in the event of a major earthquake.
Mandatory Retrofit of Buildings that are Excessively Damaged in 
Earthquakes  
Mandate retrofitting of buildings that incur excessive damage in a low level of earthquake shaking.
Fortify our Water System
The water system is the utility most vulnerable to earthquake damage, and that damage 
could be the largest cause of economic disruption following an earthquake. Portions of 
the system are more than a century old and vulnerable to many types of damage. Lack 
of water would impede recovery and the long-term loss of a water supply could lead to 
business failure and even mass evacuation.  Developing a more resilient water system is 
imperative for the future of Los Angeles.
Fortify our Water System
This report recommends the following actions:
Develop an Alternative Water System For Firefighting
Create a resilient, redundant alternative water system for firefighting by using reclaimed water, pressurized seawater, seismic 
resilient pipes and other methods.
Fortify the Los Angeles Aqueduct
Los Angeles is dependent on imported water that is transported across the San Andreas Fault in aqueducts. Therefore, mitigation 
alternatives for the Los Angeles Aqueduct crossing the San Andreas Fault should be identified and implemented.
Fortify Other Aqueducts
The city is dependent on several other aqueducts that are the responsibility of outside agencies with whom we must cooperate to 
ensure our water supply. The City should create a Seismic Resilience Water Supply Task Force with the DWP, California MWD, 
and the DWR, in an effort to create a collaborative and regional approach to protecting the resiliency of our water supply.
Fortify Water Storage
DWP dams must be maintained at a level that ensures a reliable water supply and public safety in the event of an 
earthquake.
Increase Local Water Sources
Increased use of local water reduces the risk posed by reliance on water imported via fault-crossing aqueducts. Initiatives to 
improve local water supplies through storm water capture, water conservation, water recycling, and San Fernando Valley 
Groundwater Basin contamination remediation provide the best possible protection and should be supported as fundamental earth-
quake resilience measures.
Create a Seismic Resilient Pipe Network  
The water distribution pipes that carry water to our homes are vulnerable to failure during earthquakes, and large earthquakes that 
cause shaking over wide geographic areas can cause hundreds or thousands of simultaneous pipe breaks.  DWP should 
commit to a future water system that utilizes seismically resilient pipes.  The long-term goal should be to do this across the 
City.  Due the complexity of the water system and the cost of pipe replacement, this will be a long-term project that begins in 
strategically critical areas serving essential facilities and firefighting needs.
Implement a Resilience by Design Program at DWP
L.A.s power and water infrastructure is incredibly complex and susceptible to earthquake damage.  The City should establish a 
Resilience by Design Program within the DWP, covering both the power and water systems, with resources and authority to keep an 
institutional emphasis on seismic resilience as a core function of the agency. 
Develop a Statewide Seismic Resilience Bond Measure
Developing a strong resilience effort in a timely manner requires an investment greater than currently available budget allocations. 
The City should work with local, regional, and state partners to develop a seismic resilience bond measure to help fortify our water 
infrastructure and make other critical investments.
Enhance Reliable Telecommunications
Modern society and economic activity are dependent on telecommunications, including cell phones and Internet access.  The 
Northridge earthquake occurred prior to these services being widely available, so we do not have direct experience with their 
vulnerabilities.  We can, however, use the experiences in other countries and in other disasters to inform the efforts needed to 
protect vital communications systems.
Te l e co m m u n i ca t i o n s
This report recommends initiatives to:
Maintain Internet Access After Earthquakes
To mitigate service impacts after an earthquake, the City should partner with service providers to remove barriers to 
bandwith and Internet access during emergencies. Under these agreements, service providers would, during declared 
disasters, share bandwidth and  allow free temporary Wi-Fi access in public locations.
Protect the Power System at Fault Crossings 
Our cellular network is vulnerable to power outages caused by earthquakes, and our electric grid is at high 
risk caused by powerlines that cross the San Andreas Fault. The City should create a Southern California Utility 
Resiliency Consortium to develop solutions for cascading failures in the interacting utilities as they cross the San 
Andreas fault.  The lifelines belong to many different entities, public and private, that will need to cooperate to 
find solutions to the problems.
Create a Citywide Backup Internet System
Develop a solar-powered Citywide Wi-Fi to provide residents with a way to access the Internet at a time when 
the primary system is disrupted.  This low power system could also serve as way to maintain communication 
through email and texting should electrical system failures cause other communications systems to fail.
Fortify Cellular Towers 
Cellular towers are designed and constructed to life-safety standards, meaning that they are designed to be 
unlikely to collapse, but not necessarily be functional following an earthquake. The City should amend its building 
code to require new freestanding cellular communication towers to be built with an Importance Factor of 1.5. 
Existing towers would not be affected.
Advancement of Earthquake Early Warning 
The City of Los Angeles and the U.S. Geological Survey have agreed to begin implementation of early warning 
in Southern California with projects with the Los Angeles Fire Department and the Los Angeles Unified School 
District. This partnership will allow the early warning development to eventually create a better system for all of 
California and other states. The City should work with Congressional representatives to ensure a robust
Earthquake Early Warning system.
 
 
 
12 
 
  
13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plans are worthless, but planning is everything. There is a very 
great distinction because when you are planning for an 
emergency you must start with this one thing: the very 
definition of emergency is that it is unexpected, therefore it is 
not going to happen the way you are planning.  
President Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1957 
  
 
 
 
 
  
21 
 
Introduction 
From a seismological standpoint, Northridge was not a big earthquake.  The 1994 
magnitude 6.7 earthquake occurred on a 10-mile long fault, lasted 7 seconds, and 
caused strong shaking (Intensity VIII and IX) in about 20% of the City of Los Angeles 
(USGS and SCEC, 1994).  Similar to the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, future 
earthquakes generated by the San Andreas Fault are expected to be a magnitude 
7.8 or higher, last about two minutes, and cause the same level of strong shaking 
over thousands of square miles (Jones et al, 2008).  To be ready for our seismic 
future, it is critical that the City of Los Angeles set a higher standard than having 
recovered effectively from the Northridge earthquake.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.1.  Maps of the intensity of earthquake shaking in the 1906 San Francisco 
magnitude 7.8 earthquake, the 1994 magnitude 6.7 earthquake, and predicted for 
a magnitude 7.8 earthquake on the southern San Andreas Fault. All maps are at 
the same scale.  
 
According to Swiss Re, one of the worlds largest reinsurance companies, Los 
Angeles faces one of the greatest risks of catastrophic loss from earthquakes of any 
22 
 
city in the world, eclipsed only by Tokyo, Jakarta, and Manila (Swiss Re, 2013).   
Policies, if not considered carefully, can design for disaster (Mileti, 1999. But, when 
thoughtfully developed, they can design for resilience.  While the City of Los Angeles 
has been working on a number of fronts to increase its resilience to the effects of 
earthquakes, much more work remains to be done.   
Earlier this year, Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti appointed Dr. Lucy Jones of the 
United States Geological Survey (USGS) as his Science .  
This was enabled through a Technical Assistance Agreement with USGS. In addition, 
Mayor Garcetti organized: (1) experts in his office in the areas of resilience, 
emergency management, law, infrastructure, housing, building safety, communications, 
and sustainability; (2) a Technical Task Force that included leaders of the structural 
engineering community in California and subject matter experts from Los Angeles 
Department of Building and Safety; (3) subject matter experts on water systems 
within the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power; and (4) a Communications 
Task Force that included leaders in the Communications industry.  Collectively, these 
experts constitute the Seismic Safety Task Force that prepared this Report.   
The Seismic Safety Task Force provided critical information which supported the 
development of recommendations to address vulnerabilities with significant and 
attainable solutions. Overall, the recommendations aim to: 
 Protect the lives of our residents during earthquakes; 
 Improve the capacity of the City to respond to earthquakes;  
 Prepare the City to recover quickly after earthquakes; and  
 Protect the economy of the City and all of Southern California.  
This Reports approach to evaluating the severity of the risk relies on the ShakeOut 
Scenario (Jones et al., 2008).  The ShakeOut scenario was created by a 
multidisciplinary team convened by the Multi-Hazards Demonstration Project of the 
USGS.  The Shakeout team included the California Geological Survey, Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Southern California Earthquake Center, 
and nearly 200 other partners in government, academia, emergency response, and 
industry, working to understand the impacts of a very large earthquake on the 
complicated social and economic interactions that sustain Southern California society.   
The Shakeout Scenario considers the impacts of a probable magnitude 7.8 
earthquake on the southern San Andreas Fault.  It is not the worst earthquake 
possible.  A full assessment of earthquake risk requires a probabilistic approach that 
accounts for the full range of faults, earthquakes, and likelihoods.  The ShakeOut 
Scenario considers the impact of a single event that is large enough and likely 
23 
 
enough to create a catastrophe in our lifetimes.  The ShakeOut Scenario is not 
predicting, and does not need to predict, whether this particular earthquake will 
actually occur.  The benefit of examining the consequences and far-reaching 
impacts of one such event, however, can help us prepare for other such events. 
The magnitude 7.8 ShakeOut Scenario earthquake estimates approximately 1,800 
deaths and $213 billion of economic losses across Southern California, consisting of: 
$47.7 billion due to shaking damage; $65 billion due to fire damage; $96.2 billion due 
to business interruption costs; and $4.3 billion due to traffic delays.  The most 
significant triggered hazards in this scenario are landslides, utility disruptions caused 
by fault offsets, and fire.  The Shakeout Scenario identified five major areas of loss in 
Southern California: 
1. Older buildings that were built to earlier building code standards; 
2. Non-structural elements and building contents that are generally 
unregulated; 
3. Infrastructure crossings at the San Andreas Fault; 
4. Business interruption from damaged infrastructure, including 
telecommunications, and especially water systems; and 
5. Fire following the earthquake.    
From this assessment, the Seismic Safety Task Force determined the most critical 
areas that could be addressed through policies developed by the City of Los 
Angeles, and which would have the greatest impact on the four goals of life-safety, 
emergency response, recovery, and economic resilience.  Thus, the scope of this 
Report is directed at four specific areas of seismic vulnerability: 
1. Pre-1980 "soft-first-story" buildings; 
2. Pre-1980 "non-ductile reinforced concrete" buildings;  
3. Water system infrastructure (including impact on firefighting capability); and 
4. Communications infrastructure. 
Using this approach, the Seismic Safety Task Force presents this Report, and seeks to 
spark the development of a culture in Los Angeles of creating Resilience by Design.  
  
24 
 
Why now? The risk to our economy 
People fear earthquakes because they threaten our lives.  Of all natural disasters, 
earthquakes have caused the greatest amount of fatalities in the world: 86,000 
people died in the 2005 Pakistan 7.6 magnitude earthquake; 88,000 people died in 
the 2008 China 7.9 magnitude earthquake; and the more than 200,000 people died 
in the 2010 Haiti 7.0 earthquake (EERI, 2006; USGS, 2014c; USGS, 2011). 
Almost all earthquake deaths result from the failure of human construction.  Through 
the application of stronger building code requirements in Los Angeles, we have 
reduced much of the risk to our lives.  Most of the risk we now face comes from the 
harsh reality that no building code in the world is retroactive.  A building is only as 
good as the code that was in place when it was built.  Neither concrete nor soft-
first-story buildings can be constructed in Los Angeles today, but thousands of these 
buildings remain in existence around the City because they were built at a time 
when the building code permitted their construction.  The collapse of the new Olive 
View Hospital in the 1971 San Fernando earthquake illustrated the inadequacies of 
the existing codes for reinforced concrete buildings, yet un-retrofitted structures 
continue to stand across Los Angeles.  The 1994 Northridge earthquake revealed 
problems with soft-first-story construction, notably the collapse of the Northridge 
Meadows Apartments.  According to the Public Policy Institute of California (2006), 
Los Angeles lost 49,000 housing units in the Northridge earthquake, two-thirds of 
which were in soft-first-story buildings.  Again, the failure of these buildings did not 
make the thousands of soft-first-story buildings disappear (Xia, 2014).  The larger 
ShakeOut Scenario of a southern San Andreas Fault earthquake predicts the 
collapse of 1,500 buildings, most of which would be concrete and soft-first-story 
buildings, causing almost 700 fatalities and thousands of other casualties (Jones et al., 
2008).   
To put these figures in context, the 700 fatalities reflected in the Shakeout Scenario 
are less than the number of people who will die in traffic accidents in Los Angeles 
over a three-year period (Los Angeles County Department of Public Health, 2011). 
The relative risk that earthquakes pose to our economy, however, is much greater.  
The USGS and FEMA analyzed all of the faults across the nation and determined 
the expected loss from all of them.  In that analysis, Los Angeles County alone 
represents one quarter of the expected losses of the whole country, an average of 
$1.5 billion per year (FEMA, 2008).  
  
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1-2. A schematic of the impact of a disaster on a regional economy, from 
Perry et al. (2008). 
 
 
When the biggest earthquakes occur, with potentially hundreds of years of 
annualized loss happening at once, we face a catastrophic depression of our 
regional economy.  When a damaging earthquake strikes there is an immediate 
drop in economic activity (see Figure 1-2).  If infrastructure comes back into service 
without a long delay, the recovery will be quicker and the regional economy may 
return to its expected level within a few years.  In great earthquakes, economic 
activity may not recover for several decades, resulting in economic catastrophe.  In 
some cases, the economy remains functional but has a permanent long-term 
reduction compared to the pre-event levels.  In the greatest extreme, the economic 
activity never recovers but continues to decline, disabling a safe and equitable 
lifestyle for city residents (Davis, 2012). 
Hurricane Katrina stands as one of the most destructive natural disasters that the 
United States has weathered to date. After its initial landfall on August 25, 2005, and 
then again in Louisiana on August 29, 2005, the hurricane caused over 1,800 deaths.  
The vast majority of these fatalities occurred in Louisiana, particularly concentrated in 
New Orleans.  In addition to these deaths, the hurricane caused an estimated $108 
billion in direct damages in both Louisiana and Mississippi. Thousands of homes and 
26 
 
businesses were destroyed, with debris from these ruined buildings remaining on the 
ground years after the storm waters had receded (Knabb et al., 2005). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1-3. The Gross Domestic Product of the Nashville, TN and 
 
New Orleans, LA metropolitan area per year. Data Source: U.S. 
 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, Google Data 
 
 
Yet even with all of this direct damage, one of the most chilling effects of the storm 
was how it severely reduced the long-term population in affected areas.  From July 
of 2005 to June of 2006, 237,000 people migrated away from Louisiana (Olshanksy, 
2006).  By 2014, census data showed that only 100,000 of those people had returned 
(Corey, 2011).  New Orleans maintained a unique and precious culture prior to 
Hurricane Katrina, and has struggled to recover to pre-Katrina conditions with a 
sizeable portion of its population still, perhaps even permanently, displaced.  Should 
an earthquake cause comparable levels of devastation in Los Angeles, a similar 
migration pattern could occur.  Losses would not be limited to those directly caused 
by the earthquake. 
A similar long-term depression faced San Francisco after the great San Andreas 
27 
 
earthquake of 1906.  The economic disruption from the earthquake immediately 
reduced United States GNP by 1.5 to 1.8%.  Most of the loss was covered by British 
insurance companies.  The capital outflow prompted the Bank of England to raise 
interest rates and discriminate against American requests for loans.  British bank 
policy pushed the United States into a recession and set the stage for the 1907 
financial crisis.  In 1905, San Francisco was the sixth largest city in the United States 
with a population of 400,000 (USGS, 2014a).  Over the next two decades, as other 
American cities grew several fold, San Francisco initially dropped in population and 
later experienced only limited growth (Odell, 2004).  The New Orleans and San 
Francisco examples demonstrate that building resilience is key to preventing negative 
long-term impacts. 
 
1906 
earthquake 
 
 
Figure 1-4. The population of the Cities of San Francisco and Los Angeles (U.S. Census Data). 
 The population of Los Angles grew fivefold in the decade after the 1906 earthquake struck 
San Francisco. 
28 
 
 
For Los Angeles, the second most populous city in the United States, with a gross 
domestic product (GDP) of nearly $81 billion (Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2013), and 
home to the largest container and cargo port in the United States, the economic 
consequences from a large earthquake would be devastating and could generate 
unforeseeable rippling effects beyond City boundaries.  A large earthquake affecting 
the City of Los Angeles impacts Los Angeles County, California and the entire nation.   
In the wake of the major disasters that have taken place in recent years, the 
demand for a new proactive science-based approach toward resilience has 
surfaced.  The first step is a thorough understanding of the vulnerabilities and the 
potential for single points of failure.  This has already been done for large Southern 
California earthquakes through the work completed in the ShakeOut Scenario.  The 
next step is to develop approaches that could reduce the vulnerabilities and the 
potential for catastrophic collapse.   
This  is the beginning of that effort.  The Report outlines 
recommendations for cultivating resilience in the Citys soft-first-story and concrete 
building stock, and the regions water system and telecommunications network.  
Within a large city like Los Angeles, this is a complex task.  Thus, the goal of this 
Report, and its set of recommendations, is not to eliminate all hazards or threats.  
Rather, it is to mitigate key known hazards and their cascading effects, with the 
ultimate goal of protecting the economic viability of the City of Los Angeles.  Thus, 
Los Angeles can evolve into a City that creates its Resilience by Design.   
 
 
References 
Benfer, N. A., & Coffman, J. L. (1974). San Fernando, California, Earthquake of February 9, 1971. (Vols. 
1A, 1B). Washington: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce. (2013, September 17). Economic Growth 
Widespread Across Metropolitan Areas in 2012. Retrieved from 
http://www.bea.gov/newsreleases/regional/gdp_metro/2013/pdf/gdp_metro0913.pdf 
Corey, C. M., & Deitch, E. A. (2011). Factors Affecting Business Recovery Immediately after Hurricane 
Katrina. Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 19, 169-181. Retrieved July 16, 2014, from the 
Wiley Online Library Database. 
Davis, C. A., (2012, January 12). Lifeline System Serviceability and Megacity Disaster Resilience: 
29 
 
Multihazard Impacts in Coastal Regions. Retrieved from seminar proceedings on Large Scale 
Combined Geotechnical Hazards in Coastal Urban Areas, Kyoto University, Japan, Uji Obaku Campus. 
Earthquake Engineering Research Institute (EERI). (2006, February). The Kashmir Earthquake of October 
8, 2005: Impacts in Pakistan. Retrieved from https://www.eeri.org/lfe/pdf/kashmir_eeri_2nd_report.pdf 
Federal Emergency Management Agency. (2008). HAZUS MH Estimated Annualized Earthquake Losses 
for the United States. Retrieved from http://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/20130726-1627-20490-
0934/fema366b.pdf 
Field, E.H., Biasi, G.P., Bird, P., Dawson, T.E., Felzer, K.R., Jackson, D.D., Johnson, K.M., Jordan, T.H., 
Madden, C., Michael, A.J., Milner, K.R., Page, M.T., Parsons, T., Powers, P.M., Shaw, B.E., Thatcher, W.R., 
Weldon, R.J., II, and Zeng, Y., 2013, Uniform California earthquake rupture forecast, version 3 
(UCERF3)The time-independent model: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 20131165, 97 p., 
California Geological Survey Special Report 228, and Southern California Earthquake Center 
Publication 1792, http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2013/1165/. 
Jones, L. M., Bernknopf, R., Cox, D., Goltz, J., Hudnut, K., Mileti, D., Perry, S., Ponti, D., Porter, K., Reichle, 
M., Seligson, H., Shoaf, K., Treiman, J., & Wein, A. (2008). The ShakeOut Scenario: U.S. Geological 
Survey Open-File Report 2008-1150 and California Geological Survey Preliminary Report 25. Retrieved 
from http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2008/1150/ 
Knabb, R., Rhome, J., & Brown, D. (2005). Tropical Cyclone Report Hurricane Katrina 23-30 August 
2005. National Hurricane Center. (2005, December 20). Retrieved August 14, 2014, from National 
Hurricane Center. 
Los Angeles County Department of Public Health. (2011). Mortality In Los Angeles County 2011. 
Retrieved from http://publichealth.lacounty.gov/dca/data/documents/mortalityrpt11.pdf 
Mileti, Dennis. (1999). Disaster by Design: A Reassessment of Natural Hazards in the United States. 
Washington, D.C.: Joseph Henry Press.  
Olshansky, R. (2006). Planning After Hurricane Katrina. Journal of the American Planning Association, 
72, 147-153. Retrieved July 14, 2014, from the Taylor and Francis Online Database 
Odell, K. A. & Weidenmier, M.D. (2004, December 4). Real Shock, Monetary Aftershock: The 1906 San 
Francisco Earthquake And The Panic Of 1907. Journal of Economic History, 6, 1002-1027. 
Perry, S., D. Cox, L. Jones, R. Bernknopf, J. Goltz, K. Hudnut, D. Mileti, D. Ponti, K. Porter, M. Reichle, H. 
Seligson, K. Shoaf, J. Treiman, , and A. Wein, 2008, The ShakeOut Earthquake Scenario; a story that 
southern Californians are writing: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1324 and         California Geological 
Survey Special Report 207, 16 p.  [http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1324/].  
Philibosian, B.,  Fumal, T., and Weldon, R. (2011). San Andreas Fault Earthquake Chronology and Lake 
Cahuilla History at Coachella, California. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 101 (1). pp. 13-
38. ISSN 0037-1106 
Public Policy Institute of California - Northridge Earthquake- Just the Facts, April 2006, 
30 
 
http://www.ppic.org/content/pubs/jtf/JTF_NorthridgeJTF.pdf 
Swiss Re. (2013). Mind the Risk, A global ranking of cities under threat from natural disasters. Retrieved 
from http://media.swissre.com/documents/Swiss_Re_Mind_the_risk.pdf 
U.S. Geological Survey. (2011). Earthquake Information for 2010. Retrieved from 
http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqarchives/year/2010/ 
U.S. Geological Survey. (2014a). Casualties and damage after the 1906 Earthquake. Retrieved from 
http://earthquake.usgs.gov/regional/nca/1906/18april/casualties.php 
U.S. Geological Survey. (2014b). 1857 Fort Tejon Earthquake. Retrieved from 
http://earthquake.usgs.gov/research/parkfield/1857.php 
U.S. Geological Survey. (2014c). Magnitude 7.9 - Eastern Sichuan, China. Retrieved from 
http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2008/us2008ryan/#summary. 
U.S. Geological Survey and the Southern California Earthquake Center. (1994, October 21). The 
Magnitude 6.7 Northridge, California, Earthquake of 17 January 1994. Science. 266, 389-397. 
Xia, Rosanna. (2014). L.A. to list Structures that could be at risk in quake. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 
from http://www.latimes.com/local/la-me-earthquake-inspections-20140529-story.html 
 
 
  
31 
 
Strengthen Our Buildings 
 
Overview 
The most obvious threat from earthquakes is physical damage to vulnerable 
buildings.  Buildings can be built to withstand strong earthquake shaking, but because 
of the increased costs associated with such enhancements, most are not.  Many 
people believe that the modern building code ensures that our buildings will not be 
severely damaged in earthquakes.  The current building code, however, was 
designed to maximize life-safety (Liel et al., 2010), and not to minimize building 
damage.  This standard means that while buildings are designed to remain standing 
and protect occupants from collapse, they are not designed to remain usable after 
strong earthquakes.  A strong earthquake in Los Angeles would cause some 
buildings to collapse, but would leave many more standing but unusable, which 
would close businesses, deny residents access to goods and services, and devastate 
our economy. 
Further, building codes are not retroactive.  This means that building code changes 
do not trigger automatic retrofits of buildings built to earlier codes. Earthquakes 
often trigger building code changes after shaking exposes weaknesses in types of 
buildings or construction techniques.  But this only results in future buildings reflecting 
the lessons learned; existing buildings remain in their vulnerable state.  
In the recent history of Los Angeles, the 
strongest earthquake shaking has been 
experienced in the northern parts of the San 
Fernando Valley in 1971 and 1994 (USGS, 2014).  
The result is that many buildings located in 
other parts of the City have not experienced 
the impact of strong earthquake shaking, and 
remain largely untested.  Thus, these 
buildings may have hidden vulnerabilities that 
might only be discovered in the next large 
earthquake. 
Figure 2-1.  Historic intensity Map. The 
In order to address the issues posed by these maximum level of shaking (described by the 
building vulnerabilities and to further the Modified Mercalli Intensity scale) recorded 
efforts of this Report, Mayor Garcetti in southern California in any earthquake in 
convened a Technical Task Force that met the 20th Century. (Figure from D. Wald, 
USGS 2014) 
32 
 
throughout 2014.  The Task Force included leaders of the structural engineering 
community in California, and subject matter experts from the Los Angeles 
Department of Building and Safety.  The Task Force discussed these vulnerabilities, 
evaluated the types of buildings that pose the greatest risk, and developed 
recommended approaches to fixing these issues.   
 
 
The Scope of the Problem 
The 1994 Northridge earthquake demonstrates the scale of the problem.  The fault in 
the Northridge earthquake was about 10 miles long, resulting in the strongest shaking 
occurring mostly in the western part of the San Fernando Valley.  This equates to 
approximately 20% of the area of the City (USGS 2014).  Further, the highest levels of 
shaking were in the Santa Susanna Mountains (the dark red areas illustrated in 
Figure 2-2).   
In spite of this, more than 130,000 buildings required inspection due to earthquake 
damage.  The total number of buildings in Los Angeles was estimated to be 1.2 
million, so approximately 11% of all buildings in Los Angeles were affected by this 
earthquake.  
It is important to note that Northridge was not a large earthquake by geologic 
standards.  In contrast to the fault that produced the Northridge earthquake, which 
was only 10 miles long, it is estimated that the part of the fault that will move in a 
San Andreas earthquake will be 200 miles or longer.    In a San Andreas 
earthquake, intense shaking could take place across much of Southern California 
(Jones et al., 2008). 
The financial consequences of the estimated building losses in a San Andreas 
earthquake are dramatic, with about $38 billion in direct losses to buildings (Jones et 
al., 2008).  These losses can grow exponentially as a result of businesses in both the 
damaged buildings and their neighboring buildings being unable to open.  
33 
 
This scenario has played out in other 
earthquakes around the globe.  For 
example, in the 2011 Christchurch, New 
Zealand earthquake, only two buildings 
collapsed but 70% of the buildings in the 
Central Business District (CBD) were 
damaged and were too dangerous to 
occupy (LawNews, 2014).  However, all of 
the buildings in the CBD were closed 
because of the possibility that an 
aftershock would cause a damaged 
building to collapse into the street or onto 
a neighboring building.  Thus, in addition 
to damage from a weak building 
impacting that buildings owner and 
tenants, weak buildings also impact 
neighboring buildings and their tenants, 
workers, and customers.  In addition, 
damaged buildings that are not removed 
can lead to blight that reduces the 
property values for everyone in the City.  
Thus, when considering the impact of 
seismic safety measures, it is important to Figure 2-4. Damage to an unretrofitted 
URM building in the 2014 South Napa 
consider the impact on the whole earthquake.  Adjacent buildings were 
community and not just the individual temporarily closed until this building could 
building owner.   be secured.  Photo: J. Maffei 
 
  
34 
 
Seismic Resilience in the Building Code 
Despite the number of earthquakes in California, there have been challenges to 
developing a seismically resilient building code.  Historically, significant code changes 
have only been made following large-scale earthquakes.  For example, the first 
building code to have a seismic design provision was the 1927 Uniform Building 
Code (UBC), which was developed after the damage from the 1925 Santa Barbara 
earthquake (FEMA, 1998), but even then it was only included as an appendix to the 
main building code.  It was not until 1961 that seismic design provisions moved from 
an appendix to the main body of the UBC (FEMA, 1998) and it was not until 1989 
that all California jurisdictions were required to use the most recent edition of the 
UBC. 
The worst buildings in earthquakes are unreinforced masonry buildings (URMs), which 
are buildings where walls of either brick or stone held together with mortar support 
the roofs.  Damage to brick buildings in the magnitude 6.4 1933 Long Beach 
earthquake led to a recommendation against building URMs in the most seismically 
active areas (Green, 2011).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2-3. Damage to an unreinforced masonry building 
 in the 1933 Long Beach earthquake. Source: USGS 
 
Yet, even the clear danger these buildings pose in an earthquake was not sufficient 
35 
 
impetus to eliminate these buildings through legislative action.  While new URM 
buildings are no longer constructed, older buildings built to earlier building codes 
remained.  Thus, during subsequent earthquakes, such as the magnitude 7.5 1952 
Kern County earthquake and the magnitude 6.7 1971 San Fernando earthquake, their 
predictable collapse continued to be responsible for the loss of life.   
Los Angeles led the way in reducing the vulnerability of these URM buildings with the 
first-ever mandatory retrofit ordinance in 1981 (City of Los Angeles, 1981).  Inspired by 
this example, the State of California passed an ordinance in 1986 requiring all local 
jurisdictions to catalog their URMs and develop a retrofitting program (California 
Legislature, 1986), that could be either mandatory or voluntary. 
The  has monitored the progress of all the 
voluntary and mandatory URM retrofitting programs.  As a result, the URM program 
offers an opportunity to compare the effectiveness of different types of retrofitting 
programs, and whether mandatory or voluntary programs can be successful.  
Mandatory programs were adopted by 134 jurisdictions, while 126 jurisdictions chose 
voluntary or notification programs.   
Under mandatory retrofit programs, 87% of URMs have either been retrofitted or 
demolished.  Under voluntary programs, only 22% of URMs have been retrofitted or 
demolished (, 2006).  In the City of Los Angeles, 
which has the longest-running mandatory URM retrofit program, over 99% of URMs 
have been retrofitted or demolished.  Thus, mandatory programs have a higher rate 
of successfully eliminating dangerous buildings.  
  
36 
 
Soft-First-Story Buildings 
Issue 
Soft-first-story buildings have large open sections on the first floor, such as garages, 
tuck-under parking spaces, or large windows that create an unusually flexible or 
weak first story.  They therefore do not have the resistance to an earthquakes shear 
(sideways) motions that is needed to hold up the upper floors.  Because the damage 
to a soft-first-story building is concentrated in the lowest level, the first floor collapses 
and the rest of the building pancakes onto the first floor.  This results in the 
complete destruction of the building and the potential for significant loss of life 
(FEMA, 2012a). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2-5. The Northridge Meadows Apartments 
after the January 17, 1994 Northridge earthquake.  
 Source: Los Angeles Times 
 
 
37 
 
In Southern California, many soft-first-story buildings are apartment complexes with 
tuck- under parking.  This type of building was built extensively beginning in the 
1960s, in light of the growing need for parking spaces.  This structure type includes 
the Northridge Meadows apartment building that collapsed during the 1994 
earthquake and killed 16 people.  In addition to apartment complexes, soft first 
stories can also be found in other types of residential and commercial or industrial 
buildings.  
 
Background  
The 1994 Northridge earthquake demonstrated the weaknesses in soft-first-story 
buildings and the impact such structures have on the City following an earthquake.  
Similar to the Northridge Meadows apartment complex mentioned previously, two-
thirds of the 49,000 housing units made uninhabitable by the Northridge earthquake 
were structures with soft first stories, making soft-first-story buildings the most 
damaged type of building from that earthquake (California Seismic Safety 
Commission, 1995).  In total, about 200 soft-first-story buildings suffered severe 
damage or complete collapse (FEMA, 2012b).  
The economic impact of these losses went well beyond the loss of the buildings. 
Tenants, homeowners, and business owners all struggled with the effects of the 
earthquake.  Soft-first-story buildings housed many low-income residents with fewer 
options for recovery, leaving many displaced from their homes and seeking shelter.  
It is noteworthy that the only years in which Los Angeles has experienced a 
decrease in population are 1971-1972 and 1994-1995, which are the two years after 
our two largest earthquakes (U.S. Census data). 
Currently, there are more than 29,000 wood-frame apartment buildings with five or 
more units built prior to 1978 (the year that California adopted the 1976 Uniform 
Building Code) in the City of Los Angeles, and nearly 16,000 of these are estimated 
to be soft-first-story buildings.  All of them are subject to the rent-stabilization 
ordinance.  The loss of these rent-stabilized buildings in a big earthquake would 
eliminate a large amount of affordable housing in Los Angeles. 
Fortunately, the engineering problem with soft-first-story buildings is easily understood. 
The remedy to the structural problem is straightforward and can be performed 
without considerable disruption to a buildings residents.  
  
38 
 
Recommendation 
Mandatory Retrofit of Soft-First-Story Buildings.  Implementation of a City ordinance 
requiring mandatory retrofit of soft-first-story buildings.  The Seismic Safety Task 
Force proposes the draft ordinance that is presented in Appendix A. 
The main features of this proposed solution include:  
 The retrofit will be mandatory for all soft-first-story buildings except for 
single-family homes and residences with three or fewer units.  
 The Los Angeles Department of Building and Safety (DBS) will identify 
the buildings covered by this ordinance and will notify those building 
owners.   
 Retrofitting will address the first floor structural deficiency. 
 Retrofitting of these buildings will be completed within five years after 
passage of the ordinance.   
  
39 
 
Non-Ductile Reinforced Concrete 
Issue 
Non-ductile reinforced concrete buildings are among the deadliest buildings in 
earthquakes around the world.  California faced this problem with the collapse of 
the Olive View Hospital in the 1971 San Fernando earthquake, which exposed the 
deficiencies of these types of buildings and led to significant changes in the building 
code that prevented their future construction.  However, older concrete buildings 
with these problems still exist across the City.  
Older non-ductile reinforced concrete buildings are currently used as apartment 
complexes, schools, hospitals, office buildings, warehouses and more.  Thousands of 
people in Los Angeles live and work within these structures every day (Anagnos et 
al., 2012).  Significant damage to this type of building could not only present 
immediate safety concerns following a major earthquake, but could cause long-term 
or even permanent disruption to a community.  Repairing damage or demolishing 
unsafe buildings, with the resulting loss of tenant space and the closure of businesses, 
are costs that can cripple the economy.  The loss of historic buildings and landmarks 
could also change the character of Los Angeles. 
Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) data estimates that Los 
Angeles has over 1,400 non-ductile reinforced concrete buildings, many of which 
could be at risk for collapse in future earthquakes (Anagnos et al., 2012).  The 
ShakeOut Scenario estimates that if the San Andreas earthquake happens on a 
weekday morning, almost 8,000 people will be in commercial concrete buildings that 
suffer partial or total collapse (Jones et al., 2008).  Non-ductile reinforced concrete 
buildings, therefore, pose a significant threat to the life safety, business continuity, and 
economic resilience of the Los Angeles region. 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2-7. The Kaiser Permanente Office Building, a 
 non-ductile concrete building that suffered partial 
collapse in the January 17, 1994 Northridge earthquake.  
 
Background 
Concrete buildings are a major contributor to earthquake losses around the world.  
In California, those constructed to building code standards earlier than the code 
improvements in 1976 are at particular risk for collapse and pose significant life-
safety hazards.  
While ductile materials and appropriate connections and detailing have the ability to 
plastically deform or bend in order to absorb high amounts of energy before failure, 
brittle materials and detailing do not.  Non-ductile reinforced concrete buildings are 
brittle, and they have a limited capacity to absorb the energy of strong ground 
shaking past their limited elastic range, increasing the likelihood of collapse and 
mortality for inhabitants.  
Concrete building damage has been the cause of significant losses in past California 
earthquakes.  The Olive View Hospital, the San Fernando Valley Juvenile Hall, Camp 
Karl Holton Juvenile Facilities, several hospitals, and the Sheraton-Universal Hotel 
were heavily damaged or partially collapsed (Benfer, 1974) in the 1971 San Fernando 
earthquake.  The 1994 Northridge earthquake caused failures in older, non-ductile 
concrete-frame structures, including Saint Johns Hospital, John F. Kennedy Senior 
41 
 
High School, Champaign Tower, a Holiday Inn, and a Kaiser Permanente Office 
Building (EERI, 1995). 
Similar failures have been seen globally. The collapse of two reinforced concrete 
structures in the 2011 Christchurch, New Zealand magnitude 6.3 earthquake caused 
135 out of the 182 total fatalities (Kam, 2011).  
In a strong earthquake here, we can expect that some concrete buildings will 
collapse but that many more will have to be torn down because they are unsafe 
due to damage.  
Data from the California Office of Emergency Services, shown in the figure below, 
evidences the damage incurred by concrete buildings during the 1994 Northridge 
earthquake.  A red tag indicates that a building experienced significant damage and 
was unsafe for habitation.  A yellow tag identifies a building that experienced 
moderate damage, but that might have been available for use following repair.  A 
green tag means the building was safe, although it might have incurred some slight 
damage.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2-8. The figure above refers to concrete buildings.  A relatively small 
 portion of Los Angeles actually received strong shaking in the Northridge 
earthquake, where more than 30% of concrete buildings suffering significant 
 damage. 
In the areas of the City that experienced low levels of shaking, 18% of buildings 
inspected received a red or yellow tag.  In areas of the City that experienced higher 
42 
 
shaking levels, at least 30% of buildings were designated with red or yellow tags.  
And this was a region where the worst concrete buildings had already been 
damaged and removed in 1971.  
That any buildings were damaged in areas with lower levels of shaking demonstrates 
that some buildings are particularly weak.  One building might be more damaged 
than a neighboring building because a) its design makes it inherently weaker, b) the 
implementation of the design (actual techniques and materials in construction) was 
substandard, or c) the soils under that lot are particularly loose or otherwise amplify 
shaking from the earthquake.  These circumstances will continue to exist in future 
earthquakes, so a building that incurs significantly more damage than its neighbors in 
an earthquake is expected to continue to perform poorly in subsequent earthquakes.   
One way to address this is to require any building that is disproportionately 
damaged in low levels of seismic shaking to be retrofitted and seismically upgraded 
when the earthquake damage is repaired.  Such an Excessive Damage Ordinance, 
similar to one developed in San Francisco, can be an effective way to identify those 
buildings most at risk.  While building evaluations by engineers generally succeed at 
identifying the buildings at risk, actual earthquake shaking is the best test of a 
buildings strength.  
Unlike other types of buildings, identifying the concrete buildings that are at risk 
poses challenges since a simple visual inspection does not reveal which buildings are 
at risk.  The engineering community has developed an approach to identifying 
vulnerable concrete buildings.  The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) has 
developed ASCE 41, a document that describes the standards and process for 
assessing and retrofitting these types of buildings (Pekelnicky and Poland, 2012).  A 
FEMA-funded research project currently underway by the Concrete Coalition, a 
collaboration of entities focused on assessing and mitigating the risk associated with 
dangerous non-ductile concrete buildings, is developing a more refined set of criteria 
to better identify the buildings that are the most likely to fail during an earthquake.  
The results of this study are expected by 2016. 
The  recommended retrofit of concrete buildings 
in 1995, but no jurisdiction has adopted a mandatory retrofitting program (California 
Seismic Safety Commission, 1995).  Similar to its approach to the URM issue, Los 
Angeles has the opportunity to be a leader in tackling the concrete building 
challenge and, if it does, will enhance its resilience as a City tremendously.  
  
43 
 
Recommendations 
Mandatory Retrofit of Concrete Buildings.  Mandate that concrete buildings designed 
prior to the enactment of the 1976 Uniform Building Code meet the Basic Safety 
Objective (BSO) in the ASCE 41.  The Seismic Safety Task Force proposes the draft 
ordinance that is presented in Appendix B. 
The main features of this proposed solution include:  
 Mandatory retrofitting for all concrete buildings designed to a building 
code prior to the 1976 Uniform Building Code.  
 The minimum standard for retrofitting is the Basic Safety Objective in 
ASCE 41.  
 Owners would have five years after enactment to complete an 
evaluation with a structural engineer to determine what if any 
retrofitting they will need to complete.  After certification of this 
evaluation by the Department of Building and Safety, the building 
owner will then submit a retrofitting plan.  
 Owners would have 25 years to complete the retrofit work.  
 The retrofitting process, include the evaluation, the submission of plans, 
and the actual retrofitting will be complete within 30 years.  
Mandatory Retrofit of Buildings that are Excessively Damaged in Earthquakes.  
Mandate retrofitting of buildings that incur excessive damage in a low level of 
earthquake shaking (less than 40%g on the USGS ShakeMap).   
  
44 
 
Back To Business Program 
Issue 
Recovery from a major earthquake, and the resiliency of Los Angeles, will depend 
upon our collective ability to ensure that the business community is able to rebound 
quickly and return to a normal level of functionality.  If this can be achieved, 
residents will be more likely to return to their jobs and will be less likely to leave or 
abandon the City.  In the event of a major catastrophic earthquake, the City will be 
required to focus on essential core services in order to ensure the safety of its four 
million inhabitants.  Further, the Citys cadre of Building Inspectors may be stretched 
thin and it could take days for mutual aid inspectors to be activated, mobilized, and 
ready to work.  In the biggest events, hundreds of other jurisdictions will be 
competing for the available volunteer inspectors. 
Background 
The inspection of the Citys hundreds of thousands of buildings can be facilitated by 
the development of a program where the City pre-certifies private emergency 
inspectors, who are licensed engineers, to be automatically deputized upon 
Declaration of an Emergency.  These pre-certified engineers, who will work in 
collaboration with the Citys Department of Building and Safety, can assist businesses 
in inspecting specific pre-identified buildings.  The resulting benefit will be that many 
businesses will no longer need to wait for a City inspector or mutual aid inspector to 
arrive. The Citys resiliency efforts would be enhanced by enabling people to get 
back to work quickly, and enabling local businesses to support the community with 
needed supplies and commerce. 
Such a program is not without precedent, and the need for such a program is 
illustrated by evaluating large-scale earthquakes in California.  Statistics from the 1989 
Loma Prieta earthquake, the 1994 Northridge earthquake, and other large-scale 
earthquakes demonstrate that such events can overwhelm the capabilities of a City, 
and stretch all of its resources.  In the two weeks following the Northridge 
earthquake, there were an average of 176 volunteer building inspectors each day 
assisting in the Citys effort to assess building safety.  (Barnes, 2014). 
After the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, San Francisco created a program to permit 
a building owner to retain a qualified engineer who would be available to inspect 
the building following a major earthquake and would, therefore, allow City officials to 
address other post-earthquake community needs.  Furthermore, the City of Glendale 
45 
 
and a major film studio there established a program allowing for pre-qualified 
engineers to inspect its buildings.  
While there are mutual aid programs available to assist any jurisdiction with post-
earthquake inspections, the need following a catastrophic earthquake will be great.  
For example, the States Safety Assessment Program (SAP) includes a mutual aid 
agreement to deputize trained engineers and architects as SAP Inspectors.  This 
program can be a tremendous resource for local jurisdictions following a major 
earthquake.  Unfortunately, it can take several days to request the aid, organize the 
inspectors, arrange for their transportation into an affected area, organize the 
assignments, and then, finally, start inspecting.  Many jurisdictions will also be vying 
for their services following a major earthquake.  Incorporating a cadre of private 
building inspectors, who work in cooperation with City officials, can improve the 
resiliency of the City and its business community.  
Recommendation 
Adoption of a Back to Business Program: Adopt a Back to Business Program to 
supplement the capacity of the Citys building inspection force in the event of a 
major earthquake.  The Seismic Safety Task Forces proposal is presented in 
Appendix C. 
The main features of this proposed solution include:  
 Private emergency inspectors will be pre-certified by the Los Angeles 
Department of Building and Safety and will be retained by participating 
building owners.  
 The certified inspectors will respond to and inspect the building.   
 The certified inspectors will work with the Department of Building and Safety 
to evaluate the inspection.  The Department of Building and Safety will review 
the recommended posting and issue the official Building and Safety Placard 
on the building.   
  
46 
 
Rating System 
Issue 
Buildings in any City are built under a variety of building codes, depending on what 
code was in effect at the time the building was designed and constructed.  Some 
buildings have been retrofitted or otherwise structurally enhanced over the years 
and some have not.  The result is that absent the assistance of an evaluation by a 
structural engineer, the average building owner, prospective building purchasers, 
tenants, residents, or other members of the public do not have a clear 
understanding of a buildings seismic strength.  Moreover, current code only requires 
life-safety and many people are unaware that code-compliant buildings may very 
well be a complete financial loss.   
Background 
The United States Resiliency Council (USRC) is a nonprofit organization, formed by 
structural engineers in California, which has developed a consensus approach to 
rating the seismic resilience of buildings.  The result is a methodology that can be 
utilized to rate buildings that will ensure that reliable and consistent information is 
available to the general public about the seismic resiliency of buildings.  This rating 
system has the following characteristics (U.S. Resiliency Council, 2014): 
 It is a voluntary rating system;  
 It rates buildings from one star (poor) to five stars (excellent); 
 A three star building is a building designed and constructed to the 
current building code.  Buildings constructed to a higher standard have 
the opportunity to obtain the higher star ratings; and 
 Buildings that obtain a lower star rating can increase the number of 
stars received through the retrofitting of the building.  
Thus, the rating system is designed to encourage the construction of buildings that 
exceed the minimum standards articulated in the current building code, which would 
be more likely to be able to be utilized following a catastrophic earthquake.  Further, 
sharing the information about the seismic strength of existing buildings should 
enhance the markets desire for stronger and more resilient buildings. 
Specifically, the USRC rating system ranges from one star (loss of life is probable in 
the building) to five stars (expected to be usable after the largest probable 
earthquake).  In order to determine the exact rating of any building, an engineer 
must complete a building evaluation.  An average person, however, can estimate a 
47 
 
buildings rating by knowing: 
 
(1) The type of construction (stucco-wood frame, concrete, steel, etc.);  
(2) The date of construction; and  
(3) Whether the building has been retrofitted.   
The following table offers a comparison of the USRC ratings with general types of 
building construction.  The dates provided refer to years in which the Los Angeles 
building code was revised.  In 1989, the State of California passed legislation that 
required all jurisdictions to use the most recent version of the Uniform Building Code 
(before 1997) or International Building Code (after 1997).  Before 1989, different cities 
may have adopted the Uniform Building Code at different times. 
  
48 
 
 
Table 1 General Range of Safety Star Rating  City of Los Angeles 
Type of Date of construction 
construction 
 Before 1935 1935-1976 1976-1997 After 1997 
Wood frame 2 or 3 stars. Early houses not 3 or 4 stars. 3 or 4 stars. 
buildings, bolted to their foundation or with Assuming wood 
with or cripple walls could be 1 star.  sheathed shear 
without walls and cripple 
stucco walls. 
Unreinforced Not built after 1935. All such buildings in the City of Los Angeles known to 
masonry the Building Department have been retrofitted. This reduces loss of life but 
(brick) will not preserve the function of the building - 1 or 2 stars. 
Concrete 1 star unless retrofitted or assessed as 2 or 3 stars 3 or 4  stars  
safe by a structural engineer, then 2 
stars 
Steel N/A 2 to 3 stars 2  to 3 stars 3 or 4 stars  
Public safety 1 or 2 stars  1 to 3 stars if 2 to 4 stars  4 stars 
facilities retrofitted 
 
Hospitals Because of state regulations, existing hospital buildings built before 1976 and 
still in use should achieve 2 to 3 stars. Hospitals built between 1976 and the 
mid 2000s before the more common use of advanced technologies such 
as base isolation may achieve 3-4 stars. Hospitals built within the past 
decade are expected to achieve 4 or more stars. 
 
Base Isolated Base isolation technology is able to provide a 5 star rating. It was first 
Buildings implemented in California in 1985. It has been used in the design of new 
buildings and the retrofit of existing buildings including Los Angeles City Hall.   
 
 
 
  
49 
 
 
Recommendation 
Voluntary Ratings of Buildings.  Adoption and implementation of a voluntary rating 
system, utilizing the system designed by the United States Resiliency Council.  The 
Seismic Safety Task Forces proposal is presented in Appendix D.   
The main features of this proposed solution include:  
 Adoption of the USRC system. 
 Dissemination of information about the rating system to the public about how 
the rating systems work, and how they can use the information.  
 Rating of City-owned buildings. 
 
  
50 
 
 
References 
American Legal Publishing Corporation. (1998). Los Angeles Municipal Code: Chapter IX Building 
Regulations: Article 1 Buildings: Voluntary Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Existing Wood Frame 
Residential Buildings with Soft, Weak, or Open Front Walls. Retrieved from: 

Anagnos, T., Comerio, M., Goulet, C., May, P., Greene, M., McCormick, D., & Bonowitz, D.. (2012). 
Developing Regional Building Inventories: Lessons from the Field.  Earthquake Spetra, V. 28, n.4, p. 
1305-1329. 
Association of Bay Area Governments. (2014). Speeding Up Post-Disaster Business Building 
Reoccupancy. Retrieved from: http://www.abag.ca.gov/bayarea/eqmaps/business/BORP.html 
Applied Technology Council. (2009). ATC 52-3: Here TodayHere Tomorrow: The Road to Earthquake 
Resilience in San Francisco: Earthquake Safety for Soft-Story Buildings. Retrieved September 16, 2014 
from http://www.sfgsa.org/modules/showdocument.aspx?documentid=9756 
Barnes, James, Lead Statewide Safety Assessment Program Coordinator, California Governors Office 
of Emergency Services, interview November 2014.  
Benfer, N. A., & Coffman, J. L. (1974). San Fernando, California, Earthquake of February 9, 1971. (Vols. 
1A, 1B). Washington: U.S. Dept. of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
California Legislature. The URM Law, Section 8875 et seq., Government Code, California Statutes of 
1986,  
U.S. Geological Survey. (2007, February 1). CISN ShakeMap for Northridge Earthquake. Retrieved 
September 15, 2014 from http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/shakemap/sc/shake/Northridge/  
 (2007). The Field Act and Public School Construction: A 2007 
Perspective. Seismic Safety Commission. Retrieved September 15, 2014, from 
http://www.seismic.ca.gov/pub/CSSC_2007-03_Field_Act_Report.pdf 
. (1995).  Northridge Earthquake Turning 
Loss to Gain. Retrieved from http://www.seismic.ca.gov/pub/cssc95-01/cssc5-01b-toc.pdf. 
. (2006). Status of the Unreinforced Masonry Building Law: 2006 
Progress Report to the Legislature, Seismic Safety Commission SSC Report 2006-04. Retrieved 
September 15, 2014 from http://www.seismic.ca.gov/pub/CSSC%202006%20URM%20Report%20Final.pdf  
City & County of San Francisco, Department of Building Inspection. (2014). BORP Guidelines for 
Engineers. Retrieved from http://sfdbi.org/borp-guidelines-engineers 
51 
 
City of Glendale. (2014). 20 Years after Northridge Earthquake Be: Ready with Glendales Back to 
Business Program. Retrieved from 
http://www.glendaleca.gov/Home/Components/News/News/8/2129?arch=1 
City of Los Angeles, Division 88 - Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Existing Buildings, February 13, 1981 
Earthquake Engineering Research Institute. (1995). Earthquake Spectra: Northridge Earthquake of 
January 17, 1994 Reconnaissance Report. 
FEMA. (1998). Promoting the adoption and enforcement of seismic building codes: A guidebook for 
state earthquake and mitigation managers: Appendix A: History and Principles of Seismic Design, 
FEMA-313. Retrieved from http://www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/564 
Federal Emergency Management Agency. (2012a). FEMA P-807: Guidelines for Seismic Retrofit of 
Weak-Story Wood-Framed Buildings. Retrieved from 
http://www.iitk.ac.in/nicee/wcee/article/WCEE2012_5431.pdf 
Federal Emergency Management Agency. (2012b) Simplified Seismic Assessment of Detached, Single-
Family, Wood-Frame Dwellings. 
Green, M. (2011). Building Codes for Existing and Historic Buildings. Published by John Wiley and Sons, 
http://www.wiley.com, 264 pages.  
Jones, L. M., Bernknopf, R., Cox, D., Goltz, J., Hudnut, K., Mileti, D., Perry, S., Ponti, D., Porter, K., Reichle, 
M., Seligson, H., Shoaf, K., Treiman, J., & Wein, A. (2008). The ShakeOut Scenario: U.S. Geological 
Survey Open-File Report 2008-1150 and California Geological Survey Preliminary Report 25. Retrieved 
from http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2008/1150/ 
Kam, W. Y., Pampanin, S., & Elwood, K. (2011). Seismic Performance of Reinforced Concrete Buildings in 
the 22 February Christchurch (Lyttelton) Earthquake. Retrieved from 
http://www.nzsee.org.nz/db/SpecialIssue/44(4)0239.pdf. 
LawNews. (2014, February 7). Christchurch courts receive international award for actions during 
Christchurch earthquakes. Auckland District Law Society. Retrieved September 15, 2014 from 
http://www.adls.org.nz/for-the-profession/news-and-opinion/2014/2/7/christchurch-courts-receive-
international-award-for-actions-during-christchurch-earthquakes/ 
Liel, A., Haselton, C., & Deierlein, G. (2010, July 15). Using Collapse Risk to Inform Seismic Safety 
Decisions: California's Existing Reinforced Concrete Structures. ASCE, 137(4), 492-502. 
Pekelnicky, T., & Poland, C., (2012). ASCE 41-13: Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit of Existing Buildings. 
Retrieved from: http://www.nehrp.gov/pdf/ACEHRNov2012_ASCE41b.pdf. 
City and County of San Francisco. (2013). Ordinance 45-13. Retrieved September 16, 2014 from 
http://www.sfgsa.org/modules/showdocument.aspx?documentid=10136 
San Francisco Department of Building Inspection. (2011). Building Occupancy Resumption Program. 
Retrieved from 
52 
 
http://sfdbi.org/sites/sfdbi.org/files/migrated/FileCenter/Documents/Permit_Review_Services/BORP_Progra
m.pdf 
Sankin, Aaron. (2013). San Francisco Earthquake Safety Questioned As Report Lists Nearly 3,000 
Potentially Dangerous Buildings. Retrieved from 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/14/san-francisco-earthquake-safety_n_2475044.html. 
U.S. Resiliency Council. (2014). A Standard to Measure 
Risk and Resilience. Retrieved from: http://www.usrc.org/index.html. 
U.S. Geological Survey, 2014, ShakeMap Southern California Archive, Retrieved from: 
http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/shakemap/list.php?y=2014&n=sc 
 
 
  
53 
 
Fortify our Water System 
The water system is the utility most vulnerable to earthquake damage, and that 
damage could be the largest cause of economic disruption following an earthquake.  
(Jones et al., 2008).  Protecting our water system from catastrophic failure in a major 
earthquake is essential for our economic future. 
The Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (DWP) owns and operates the 
water system within the City of Los Angeles.  Created over 100 years ago, the 
system supplies water to millions of people and businesses.  The principal sources of 
water supply are from the Los Angeles Aqueduct System, local groundwater, and 
bulk water transmission from the Colorado River and California Aqueducts overseen 
by the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD) (LADWP, 2010a).  
Providing water to Los Angeles is a complex endeavor.  In fact, DWP considers five 
separate categories for its service program:  
1. Water delivery - does something come out of the tap? 
2. Water quality - is the water clear, clean and safe to drink? 
3. Water quantity - does everyone get all the water they need? 
4. Fire protection - does the Fire Department get what they need? 
5. Functionality - is all of the water system in good working order? 
The goal of a seismically resilient water system is to limit the loss of each of these 
services in a disaster and restore them as rapidly as possible while protecting 
property, life safety, and regional social and economic stability.  Earthquakes can 
disrupt these services in many ways.  Currently, according to DWP, the City of Los 
Angeles receives approximately 88% of its water from outside the region, and all of 
that imported water has to cross the San Andreas Fault.  Earthquakes can damage 
the aqueducts and pipelines that carry our water and the reservoirs in which we 
store water.  The pipes that distribute water to residences and businesses constitute 
some of the oldest infrastructure in the City.  Hidden from view, old pipes that need 
replacement or repair can easily be ignored until they break.  Further, power is 
needed for pumps.  If the water pressure is too low, contaminants enter the system 
and the water is no longer potable.  Many water lines run near sewer lines and 
contemporaneous breaking of both increases the risk of contamination issues. 
The impact of the Northridge earthquake on the water system, and the restoration 
of water service following the earthquake, is depicted in Figure 3-1.  The graph 
illustrates the earthquakes impact on each of DWPs five service categories and the 
length of time it took each service category to return to normal levels.  Following the 
54 
 
Northridge earthquake, total water delivery service immediately dropped, with 22% of 
customers receiving no water.  An estimated 850,000 people were affected.  The 
most significant water delivery impacts were above the fault that caused the 
earthquake in the highly residential San Fernando Valley.  The water delivery service 
was restored to 100% after about 7 days, quantity and fire services between 8.5 to 9 
days, and quality service at 12 days after the earthquake.  Total water system repair 
costs for this event reached $41 million (Davis et al., 2012). 
 
 
Figure 3-1. Los Angeles Water System service restorations following the 
 1994 Northridge earthquake (Davis et al, 2012). 
 
 
A quantitative measure of the functionality of the system (including all aspects 
working correctly and not depending on temporary measures) initially dropped to 
about 34%.  In total, it took approximately 9 years to restore the complete 
functionality of the water system to pre-Northridge conditions.  
The Northridge earthquake was relatively small, compared to the potential for large-
magnitude earthquakes in Southern California.  As mentioned earlier, a San Andreas 
Fault earthquake could rupture a section of fault 200 miles long or more, making it 
15 times as long as the Northridge earthquake.  Figure 3-2 shows the results of the 
55 
 
water systems performance to the Shakeout Scenarios magnitude 7.8 earthquake.  
Under this simulation, water delivery, quantity of water delivered, and fire protection 
services are expected to drop to about 20% of normal (Davis, 2010a).  Water loss 
alone is estimated to cause about $50 billion of business disruption.  
Figure 3-2.The expected times for water service restoration after a magnitude 7.8 
ShakeOut scenario earthquake.  
The projected disruption of service shown in Figure 3-2 is 15 months of inadequate 
water supply, which would greatly undermine the resilience of Los Angeles.  
In addition to service and direct economic loss, damage to water pipe infrastructure 
would impair the Citys ability to fight fires, with the risk of exponential increases in 
the losses if the fires cannot be controlled.  In several cases, large urban 
earthquakes have spawned super-conflagrations where the damage caused by fires 
eclipsed the direct losses from the earthquake.   
  
56 
 
Firefighting Water Supply 
Issue 
It is estimated that at least 1,600 fires will be triggered by a San Andreas 
earthquake.  Damage to the water system will make fighting these fires more difficult 
and raise the possibility of catastrophic conflagrations (Jones et al., 2008).  
Background 
Fire following earthquakes has caused the largest losses in many notable 
earthquakes, for example the 1923 magnitude 7.9 Great Kanto earthquake that 
sparked subsequent fires that destroyed Tokyo and much of Yokohama, and killed 
more than 140,000 people (Hammer, 2011).  The 129 fires in Tokyo included 30 
chemical fires (Kobayashi, 1984), and the Yokohama fires destroyed more than half 
of the citys buildings or 381,000 out of 694,000 (James, 2002). 
In reaction to the fire damage following the 1906 magnitude 7.8 San Francisco 
earthquake, that city created a backup system of underground cisterns and pipes 
for firefighting (USGS, 2012).  The backup firefighting system is powered by gravity 
from two water tanks located on top of the citys biggest hills, Twin Peaks and Nob 
Hill.  The Twin Peaks Reservoir holds over 10.5 million gallons, allowing enough water 
pressure to put out large fires.  This system, called the Auxiliary Water Supply System, 
is augmented by fireboats that pump water from the Bay.  While the system fell into 
disrepair, it was restored just before the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake by order of 
then-Mayor Feinstein (Van Dyke, 2004). 
In the 1994 Northridge earthquake, damage to water system infrastructure rendered 
firefighters unable to draw water from hydrants in large parts of the San Fernando 
Valley (Davis et al., 2012).  Instead, they used swimming pools as alternative sources 
of water and used water-dropping helicopters to drop more than 15,000 gallons of 
water on structure fires.  Fire-related incidents constituted one-third of the calls for 
assistance within the first 27 hours after the earthquake (Beall, 1997). 
The recent magnitude 6.0 South Napa earthquake on August 23, 2014 further 
demonstrated the vulnerability of the water system on which our firefighters depend.  
More than 150 water main breaks were reported, leaving firefighters with inadequate 
resources to initially fight six major fires that broke out following the earthquake 
(Wetzstein, 2014).  Water pipe failures in county buildings caused more damage than 
the shaking itself, and could lead to future complications if the water damage causes 
57 
 
mold (Carter, 2014). 
A recent engineering study exploring the adequacy of the water supply for 
firefighting purposes following earthquakes in California (Scawthorn, 2010) found 
several areas of concern, including: 
 Many water agencies view providing potable water following 
earthquakes as a higher priority than firefighting;  
 Water agency system vulnerabilities are not well understood by fire 
agencies, although water and fire agencies both generally believe most 
municipal water supply systems are unreliable in a major earthquake;  
 Fire and water agency liaison is generally not very good, and is often 
somewhat indirect and solely through larger enterprise-wide 
coordination meetings; and 
 Emergency firefighting water supply is not a priority focus. 
Recommendations 
Alternative Water System.  LAFD and LADWP should develop a resilient and 
alternative water system for firefighting purposes.  This system should include: 
 Use of the reclaimed water system as a second water supply by 
developing a purple pipe system to bring reclaimed water for non-
potable use that will provide a water supply for firefighting.  The purple 
pipes should be seismic resilient pipes. 
 Use of pressurized seawater in areas close to sea level.   A network of 
pumps and pipes could deliver seawater to fight fires.  This system 
would need backup power for the pumps and seismic resistant pipes. 
 Prioritized installation of seismic resilient pipes in parts of the water 
system critical to supplying fire hydrants, and at distances consistent 
with the Fire Departments ability to relay water in a disaster.   
 Identification of alternative water supply sources useful for firefighting 
throughout the City.  In addition to swimming pools, alternative water 
sources may include local ponds, lakes, special connections added at 
existing reservoirs, the Los Angeles River, creeks, storm drains, ocean 
water, ground water, or cisterns. 
  
58 
 
 DWP and LAFD should prepare a preliminary plan for the Mayor to 
consider by July 2015.  An effective and robust plan could take years to 
develop, and additional years of implementation will be needed.  
Nevertheless, it is important that both departments work toward 
achieving these goals, under the direction of the Mayor.  
  
59 
 
 
Water Imported Across the San Andreas Fault 
Issue 
Water supplies are at risk because the aqueducts bringing outside water to Los 
Angeles cross the San Andreas Fault.  Without retrofitting, the aqueducts will be 
broken by the faults movement in the earthquake.  
Background 
Los Angeles currently imports 88% of its water supply from the Eastern Sierras, 
Colorado River, and Sacramento-San Joaquin Rivers Delta (Bay Delta).  The 
imported water comes to Los Angeles through three aqueduct systems: the Los 
Angeles Aqueducts operated by the LADWP, the Colorado River Aqueduct operated 
by MWD, and the California Aqueduct providing water through the East and West 
Branches, operated by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR) 
(LADWP, 2010a).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 3-3.  Map of California showing the location of the 
major aqueducts that bring water to Los Angeles and the 
 most probable location of future earthquake shaking. The 
highest accelerations are expected near the largest faults so 
the darkest red is along the San Andreas fault. 
60 
 
All three systems cross the San Andreas Fault.  The Los Angeles Aqueduct, Colorado 
River Aqueduct, and California Aqueduct, cross the San Andreas Fault zone a total 
of 32 times and will likely be simultaneously damaged in a single earthquake event 
resulting in the inability to import water to Los Angeles for many months (Jones et al, 
2008).  The Los Angeles Aqueduct is the only aqueduct that crosses the San 
Andreas only once (Jones et al., 2008). 
Most of us think of earthquakes as the shaking we experience.  But what causes an 
earthquake is the movement along a fault that produces the shaking as one of its 
effects.  The movement at the fault creates a permanent offset at the fault, such as 
the offsets illustrated in Figure 3-4.  Any structure built across the fault will be 
damaged by the fault displacement (or pulled apart).  The ShakeOut Scenario 
projects that the areas along the San Andreas Fault will move an estimated 10-40 
feet, destroying roads, pipelines, and aqueducts that cross the fault unless they are 
engineered to accommodate the offset.  
 
Figure 3-4. Three examples of fault crossing damage.  The railway was bent when the fault in the 
1999 Izmet, Turkey earthquake moved sideways (lower part of the picture to the left) about 7 ft.  
The dam was damaged when the 1999 Chi Taiwan earthquake moved (right side up) about 25 ft.  
The fence was broken when the 1906 San Francisco earthquake moved 5 ft. 
 
 
 
61 
 
The City of Los Angeles, as well as all of Southern California, is highly dependent on 
water imported through the three aqueduct systems.  A preliminary review of 
potential damage to these three major aqueducts in response to the ShakeOut 
earthquake scenario indicates repairs to restore flow into all of the aqueducts will 
likely take more than a year (Davis, 2010).  
There is an inadequate backup water system available to provide water to Southern 
California through the one-year aqueduct reconstruction period. Emergency water 
supplies are stored for use following an earthquake.  These supplies are stored at 
the Stone Canyon, Hollywood, and Encino Reservoirs where large water volumes are 
stored primarily for emergency purposes.  Back-up water sources are also available 
through connections with other water distribution agencies.  Additionally, MWD 
constructed the large Diamond Valley Reservoir and some local groundwater banks 
for emergency water storage, some of which can be made available to the City of 
Los Angeles.  Despite these efforts, local water storage is estimated by MWD to last 
approximately 6 months, and even then only with significant rationing. 
Recommendations 
Protect the Los Angeles Aqueduct.  Identify mitigation alternatives for the Los 
Angeles Aqueduct crossing the San Andreas Fault.   
Current infrastructure in fault crossings, like the 5-mile long, 9-foot wide Elizabeth 
Tunnel, should be improved to create a system that can survive an offset when the 
San Andreas fault ruptures.  DWP should be credited for already working on this 
program, and its plan should include:  
 Coordination with the USGS in developing the plan to engineer the 
Elizabeth Tunnel fault crossing for the expected largest offset that could 
result from a San Andreas Fault earthquake.  
 Continued work with the USGS to place instrumentation along the 
Elizabeth Tunnel alignment allowing near real-time intelligence to be 
obtained after fault movement in the San Andreas Zone. 
 A preliminary plan to reduce the risk of failure and increase the 
probability of being able to provide some level of service following a 
San Andreas earthquake impacting the Elizabeth Tunnel should be 
presented to the Mayor by July 2015.   
Protect the Other Aqueducts.  Create a Seismic Resilience Water Supply Task Force 
with the DWP, California MWD, and the DWR, in an effort to create a collaborative 
and regional approach to protecting the resilience of our water supply.  While the 
62 
 
water problem is widely recognized, the agencies have not convened to find 
solutions.  
Protect Water Storage.  Ensure that DWP dams are maintained in a safe and 
reliable manner to both ensure a reliable water supply and to ensure public safety in 
the event of an earthquake.  As part of this effort:  
 Detailed estimates for the total volume of emergency storage water, in 
coordination with local ground water supplies, that is expected to be required 
following a San Andreas earthquake and current volumes available must be 
made;  
 DWP should regularly evaluate the seismic safety of its dams, implementing 
risk-based methodologies incorporating the probabilities of events and 
consequences; and  
 Inundation maps should be updated regularly and used to inform emergency 
action plans prepared for each reservoir.  
 
  
63 
 
Develop Local Water Supplies 
Issue 
The contamination of the groundwater in the San Fernando Basin increases our 
dependence on imported water, and thus our vulnerability to damage to the 
aqueduct systems.  
Background 
Local sources of water in the Los Angeles region are unavailable because of 
contamination.  The San Fernando Valley Groundwater basin, prior to the discovery 
of contamination, provided drinking water to more than 800,000 local residents.  In 
1980, concentrations of chlorinated volatile organic compounds, including 
trichloroethylene (TCE) and perchloroethylene (PCE), were found to be above 
Federal Maximum Contaminant Levels and State Action Levels in a number of City 
production wells in the basin.  Those solvents were widely used in a number of 
industries including aerospace and defense manufacturing, machinery degreasing, 
dry cleaning, and metal plating.  Some contaminants currently affecting the basin 
can be traced as far back as the 1940s, when chemical waste disposal was 
unregulated throughout the Valley (EPA, 2013). 
Historically, Los Angeles derived a significant percentage of its water supply from 
local wells.  A groundwater monitoring program conducted from 1981 to 1987 
revealed that over 50% of the water being produced by wells in the eastern portion 
of the San Fernando Basin was contaminated.  The shutdown of these wells resulted 
in a substantial loss of drinking water, and the City turning to more expensive 
sources for water.   
Recommendation 
Develop Local Water.  In the 2010 Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP), DWP set 
goals for developing local water supplies through storm water capture, water 
conservation, and water recycling.  The 2010 UWMP addresses the need to 
remediate the San Fernando Basin and ensure extracted water meets safe drinking 
water regulations.  This plan should be aggressively pursued. 
This is particularly important because:  
 A healthy San Fernando Basin also sets a foundation for implementing 
recycled water and storm water capture projects.   
64 
 
 Local water supply development will enable DWP to reduce reliance on 
imported water and cut purchases from MWD in half by 2024.  The 
City previously sought to achieve this goal by 2035, but accelerated it 
due to Executive Directive 5 issued by Mayor Garcetti. 
 Local supply development will enhance water availability in 
emergencies.   
 Resilience will be improved with continued implementation of the local 
water supply program and San Fernando Basin remediation program. 
  
65 
 
Seismic Resilient Pipes 
Issue 
The water distribution pipes that carry water to our homes often fail in earthquakes.  
During large earthquakes, much larger areas suffer strong shaking, leading to 
hundreds or thousands of simultaneous pipe breaks.  The ShakeOut Scenario 
estimated that it could take 6 months to completely repair all of the damaged pipes 
in Southern California (Jones et al., 2008). 
Background 
Official construction of the first water system in Los 
Angeles started in 1908, joining new infrastructure with the 
Citys acquisition of existing pipes.  Pipes used in the Los 
Angeles water system, and in many water systems 
throughout the United States, are up to 120-years-old.  
More than 7,000 miles of water pipe currently run 
underneath the City, and more than 266 miles of that pipe 
system were built before 1915. 
The current pipe system is vulnerable to seismic shaking; 
even shaking from small earthquakes can cause damage.  
During the magnitude 5.1 La Habra earthquake in March 
of 2014, the City of Fullerton reported 13 water line breaks, 
including three ruptures under city streets (Los Angeles Figure 3-5. Geyser from a 
Times, 2014). Larger earthquakes cause strong shaking broken water main in the 
over a larger area and for a longer time, resulting in a 1994 Northridge earthquake. 
larger number of pipes breaking.  The City of Christchurch, 
New Zealand experienced widespread damage to its water system in the February 
2011 magnitude 6.3 event, disrupting service to most locations, which contributed to 
economic disruption.  The larger the earthquake, the more likely the number of water 
main breaks will exceed the capacity of a water agency to manage the damage.  
The consequences of broken pipes extend beyond the lack of water and include 
substantial damage caused by the water.  The July 29, 2014 water main break near 
the UCLA campus, where a Y-shaped section of a pipe burst creating a sinkhole in 
Sunset Boulevard and flooding the area with 20 million gallons of water in 3.5 hours 
(Ramallo, 2014), is a small example of the extensive water damage that could follow 
a large earthquake.  The break, attributed to the deterioration of the 83-year-old 
66 
 
pipe, caused flood damage to at least 400 cars in a nearby parking garage as well 
as to numerous buildings on the UCLA campus (Blume, 2014).  In the event of a very 
large earthquake, hundreds of similar breaks could occur throughout the City due to 
the outdated pipe system. 
Recent advances in water pipe technology have shown that it is possible to have a 
resilient water distribution system.  For example, earthquake resistant ductile iron 
pipes (ERDIP), which are currently manufactured in Japan, are designed for flexibility 
by accommodating strain and rotation while also preventing pull-out at pipe joints.  
This design relieves the impact of earthquake-induced forces and prevents breakage 
in a seismic event.  This technology has been incorporated into the buried water 
infrastructure in Japan over the past 40 years.  In numerous earthquakes, including 
the 1995 Kobe earthquake, the 2004 and 2007 Niigata earthquakes, and the 2011 
Great East Japan magnitude 9.0 earthquake, the pipe has repeatedly proven 
effective with no documented damages or leaks (Davis et al., 2013).  
Christchurch, New Zealand has utilized High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) pipe to 
replace old brittle pipes in liquefaction zones.  The HDPE has proven its ability to 
handle large seismic ground movements in several recent earthquakes near 
Christchurch (ORourke, 2014).  Other pipes have also shown their capacity to be 
adequately designed to withstand earthquake forces.  
DWP is currently constructing the second of five planned installations of ERDIP as 
part of a pilot project to investigate its use for improving the infrastructure network.  
The first completed ERDIP project consisted of laying 1,750 feet of ductile iron pipe 
along Contour Drive and was very successful.  The second installation is underway 
on Reseda Boulevard as of November 2014 (Davis et al., 2013).  
Recommendation 
Seismic Resilient Pipe Network.  DWP should commit to a future water system with a 
seismically resilient pipe network.  The long-term goal should be to do this across the 
City.  Due the complexity of the water system and the cost of pipe replacement, this 
will be a long-term project to replace pipes, beginning in strategically critical areas 
serving essential facilities and firefighting needs.   
 The replacements should be prioritized to maximize the resilience of the 
system to the earthquakes that will happen before the retrofit program is 
completed.  
 DWP should develop and present to the Mayor a timeline and proposal that 
will identify the time required to complete this program at different budget 
67 
 
levels. 
 As part of this project, the City needs to develop the most cost-efficient 
supply of seismic resistant pipes.  
  
68 
 
Seismic Resilience Plan 
Issue 
DWPs water system is one of the most complex infrastructure systems ever 
constructed.  Many parts of it are susceptible to earthquake damage, but the water 
provided through the system is critical to resilience and to maintaining the economic 
viability of Los Angeles following an earthquake.  
The challenge with the water system is that it is evolving, and has shifting needs. 
New discoveries about its vulnerability are identified following each earthquake.  
Significantly, the water system is also dependent on electric power to maintain its 
functionality. 
Background 
The DWP has undertaken numerous priority seismic mitigation projects in the past 
and several seismic improvement projects are currently part of the Capital 
Improvement Program (CIP).  For example, a number of resilience activities were 
incorporated at the Headworks Reservoir (currently in construction), such as:  
 Physical modeling and computer simulations of seismic motions. 
 Development of a new methodology to evaluate liquefaction potential 
for on-site soils containing gravels and cobbles, and implementation of 
foundation improvements.   
 Special seismic designs for inlet and outlet pipes were incorporated.   
 Seismic instrumentation to measure actual performance in earthquakes.   
 
 Fig. 3-6.  An aerial photograph of the Headworks 
Reservoir during construction. 
These and other  resilience aspects 
69 
 
of the design and construction were undertaken to ensure limited damage during an 
earthquake, and to allow rapid restoration if damage does occur. DWP could 
benefit from the further development of resilience planning in all projects.    
Many high priority seismic mitigation projects at DWP have been completed over the 
past 40 years, including addressing vulnerable buildings, pump stations, chlorination 
stations, tanks, dams, and other facilities (LADWP, 2010b).  Much of the effort has 
been directed at the performance of individual facilities, and has been led by 
individuals with a strong commitment to seismic resilience.  When those individuals 
have retired or left DWP, their individual efforts were not always maintained because 
resilience has not yet been fully institutionalized within DWP. 
Maintaining the functionality of the water system requires a functioning electrical 
system.  Pumps and computer controls both need an electrical system like most of 
the infrastructure systems serving the City.  The only time in the Citys history that the 
entire City of Los Angeles lost power was following the Northridge earthquake.  
Power was restored within 24 hours through an extraordinary effort by DWP 
(Shinozuka et al., 2003).  A repeat of this type of rapid response cannot be assumed 
in larger earthquakes, which will impact larger sections of the City.  In addition, in a 
San Andreas Fault earthquake, the natural gas supply lines could be broken by the 
fault offset.  When it breaks, its proximity to petroleum product pipelines that would 
also rupture could trigger a large explosion and fire (Jones et al., 2008).  As most of 
the in-basin electrical generation uses natural gas, this vulnerability raises the 
possibility of many weeks without electricity.  
Recommendation 
DWP Resilience by Design Program.  Establish a Resilience by Design Program at the 
highest level of DWP, covering both the power and water systems to promote an 
institutional emphasis on seismic resilience as a core function of DWP.  To be 
successful the program should:  
 Be given the resources and authority to instill the importance of making 
resilient thinking and activities a standard of practice at DWP;  
 Develop a work environment in which groups throughout the organization can 
fully understand how the water and power systems may perform in numerous 
possible earthquake scenarios, the interdependency of these two systems, and 
the core technical capabilities necessary to accomplish a successful Program. 
 Include outside experts in the Resilience by Design Program who are selected 
by the Mayor, and include an earthquake scientist, an expert in water systems 
seismic resilience, an expert in power system seismic resilience, and 
70 
 
representatives of both the water and power systems.  
 Assign a resilience manager to coordinate these efforts with senior 
management, as well as with other City departments, external agencies, and 
communities within Los Angeles.  Resilience management covers topics related 
to pre-event planning, mitigation alternatives, emergency response, post-
earthquake recovery and reconstruction.   
 
 
 
Seismic Resilience Initiative 
Issue 
Developing a strong resilience effort in a timely manner requires an investment 
greater than currently available budget allocations.  Absent significant capital 
investment to address existing and developing seismic issues, the regional economy 
could collapse following a major earthquake. 
Background 
There is a significant cost to implementing many of the proposed recommendations 
suggested in this Report.  Using seismic resistant piping may increase the total cost 
of a project by 10-20%.  The estimated cost to clean local aquifers is approximately 
$1 billion.  Other expenses to government will include strengthening the Elizabeth 
Tunnel, working with the region on other San Andreas Fault crossings, and 
developing purple piping and other alternatives to aid effective firefighting.  
Not only is the safety and security of our region at stake, but the economic viability 
of the region is at risk.  A strong capital investment in these core projects will build 
resilience in our communities for generations.  
Recommendation 
Seismic Resilience Bond Measure.  Work with local, regional, and state partners to 
develop a seismic resilience bond measure to allow for necessary investments in the 
seismic safety of our region.   
  
71 
 
 
References 
Beall, K. (1997, June 1). Thirteenth Meeting of the UNJR Panel on Fire Research and Safety, March 13-
20, 1996. National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2. Retrieved August 15, 2014. 
Blume, H. (2014, August 3). Sunset Boulevard reopens after water-main break. Los Angeles Times. 
Retrieved August 7, 2014 from http://www.latimes.com/local/la-me-ucla-cleanup-20140804-story.html. 
Carter, L. (2014, August 28). Napa quake damage rises to $362 million. The Press Democrat. Retrieved 
September 5, 2014 from http://www.pressdemocrat.com/home/2613337-181/napa-quake-damage-rises-
to#page=1 
Davis, C.A., (2010) Los Angeles water supply impacts from a M7.8 San Andreas Fault earthquake 
scenario, Journal of Water Supply: Research and TechnologyAQUA, 59.67, pp 408-417. 
Davis, C. A., ORourke, T. D., Adams, M. L., & Rho, M. A. (2012). Case Study: Los Angeles Water 
Services Restoration Following the 1994 Northridge Earthquake. 15th World Conference on Earthquake 
Engineering, paper No. 364, Lisbon, Portugal, September 24-28 2012. 
Davis, C.A., Castruita, J., Williams, G., Saddler, K., Sufi, S., Zaldivar, L., & Land, D. (2013). Los Angeles 
Pilot Project using Japanese Earthquake Resistant Joint Ductile Iron Pipe. Proc.of 8th US-Japan Taiwan 
Workshop on Water System Seismic Practices, AWWARF/JWWA, Oakland, CA, Aug. 21-23, Session 5. 
Department of Labor. (2011, December). A changing landscape: The impact of the earthquakes on 
Christchurch workplaces. Labour & Immigration Research Centre. Retrieved August 7, 2014 from 
http://www.dol.govt.nz/publications/research/earthquakes-impact-in-christchurch-
workplaces/earthquake-impact-in-christchruch.pdf 
EPA. (2013, December 23). Pacific Southwest, Region 9: Superfund: San Fernando Valley (area 2 
Glendale). Retrieved September 19, 2014 from 
http://yosemite.epa.gov/r9/sfund/r9sfdocw.nsf/ViewByEPAID/CAD980894901 
Hammer, J. (2011, May). The Great Japan Earthquake of 1923. The Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved 
August 7, 2014 from http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/the-great-japan-earthquake-of-1923-
1764539/?no-ist. 
James, C. (2002, October 8). The 1923 Tokyo Earthquake and Fire. Retrieved August 7, 2014 from 
http://nisee.berkeley.edu/kanto/tokyo1923.pdf 
Jones, L. M., Bernknopf, R., Cox, D., Goltz, J., Hudnut, K., Mileti, D., Perry, S., Ponti, D., Porter, K., Reichle, 
M., Seligson, H., Shoaf, K., Treiman, J., & Wein, A. (2008). The ShakeOut Scenario: U.S. Geological 
Survey Open-File Report 2008-1150 and California Geological Survey Preliminary Report 25. Retrieved 
from http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2008/1150/ 
Kobayashi, M. Urban Post-Earthquake Fires in Japan, 8th World Conference on Earthquake 
Engineering, San Francisco, 1984. Retrieved September 2, 2014 from 
72 
 
http://www.iitk.ac.in/nicee/wcee/article/8_vol7_785.pdf  
LADWP. (2010a). Urban Water Management Plan. Los Angeles Department of Water and Power. 
Retrieved September 16, 2014, from http://www.water.ca.gov/urbanwatermanagement/2010uwmps/Los 
Angeles Department of Water and Power/LADWP UWMP_2010_LowRes.pdf 
LADWP. (2010b). Water System Ten-Year Capital Improvement Program For the Fiscal Years 2010-2019. 
Los Angeles Department of Water and Power. Retrieved September 16, 2014, from 
http://www.ladifferentiated.com/wp-content/ 
uploads/2011/02/DWP_Water_System_10Y_Capital_Improvement_Program.pdf 
Los Angeles Times. (2014, March 31). Hundreds of aftershocks from 5.1 earthquake. Los Angeles Times. 
Retrieved August 7, 2014 from http://articles.latimes.com/2014/mar/31/local/la-me-ln-hundreds-of-
aftershocks-from-51-earthquake-20140330 
Melero, M. (2014, July 30). UCLA Water Main Break by the Numbers. NBC Los Angeles. Retrieved 
August 7, 2014 from http://www.nbclosangeles.com/news/local/UCLA-Water-Main-Break-Highlights--
269141431.html. 
O'Rourke, T., Jeon, S., Toprak, S., Cubrinovski, M., Hughes, M., Van Ballegooy, S., & Bouziou, D. (2014). 
Earthquake Response of Underground Pipeline Networks in Christchurch, NZ. Earthquake Spectra, 
30(1), 183-204. 
Ramallo, J. (2014, July 30). Westwood / Sunset Water Trunk Line Break Update Wednesday -10:30 pm. 
LADWP News. Retrieved from http://www.LADWPnews.com/go/doc/1475/2215593/. 
Scawthorn, C., (2011). Water supply in regard to fire following earthquake, PEER Report 2011/08, Pacific 
Earthquake Engineering Research Center, 123 pp.. 
Shinozuka, M., Chang, S., Cheng, T., Feng, M., O'Rourke, T., Saadeghvaziri, M., Shi, P. (2003). Resilience 
of Integrated Power and Water Systems. In Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit of Lifeline Systems, MCEER, 
65-86. Retrieved September 16, 2014 from http://mceer.buffalo.edu/publications/resaccom/04-
sp01/06_shino.pdf 
U. S. Geological Survey. (2012, July 23). The Great 1906 San Francisco Earthquake. Retrieved 
September 16, 2014 from http://earthquake.usgs.gov/regional/nca/1906/18april/index.php 
Van Dyke, S. (2004, June 7) San Francisco Fire Department Water Supply System. Virtual Museum of 
the City of San Francisco. Retrieved August 7, 2014 from http://www.sfmuseum.org/quake/awss2.html 
Verdin, T., Leff, L., Thanawala, S., & Bonnell, C. (2014, August 24). Napa earthquake is area's strongest 
in 25 years: Injuries, damage reported after quake. KCRA. Retrieved September 5, 2014 from 
http://www.kcra.com/news/usgs-60-earthquake-shakes-northern-california/27703718#!bQbJfp 
Wetzstein, J., Todorov, K., & Yune, H. (2014, August 24). Shattered property, bruised lives. Napa Valley 
Register. Retrieved September 5, 2014 from http://napavalleyregister.com/news/local/shattered-
property-bruised-lives/article_1af7d38c-2d23-532d-a9da-b2c5c9e3def4.html 
73 
 
Enhance Reliable Telecommunications 
The 1994 magnitude 6.7 Northridge earthquake occurred at the dawn of the Internet 
era, before the release of Mosaic (the first Internet browser), the formation of the 
World Wide Web (World Wide Web Consortium, 2014), and before cellular devices 
were in popular use.  Twenty years later, the Internet and cellular communication 
have become integral to society (Pew Research Center, 2014a) and 90 percent of all 
adults in the United States now own a mobile phone (Pew Research Center, 2014b).  
Telecommunications have become a critical part of societys infrastructure, necessary 
for all high-functioning urban settings, including the City of Los Angeles. 
The rise of the Internet has moved telecommunications from an amenity to a critical 
lifeline of our society and economy.  Modern society assumes that information and 
the ability to communicate information will always be available and the lack of 
information could impede both the regional economy and the well-being of residents 
Telecommunication technologies can help people ensure the safety of loved ones, 
collect emergency or disaster related information, and call for help, but a large 
earthquake is likely to cause significant disruption to these services (Jones et al., 
2008).  Moreover, any longer-term disruption of these services will impede recovery, 
amplifying economic losses.   
Analysis of communication systems in disasters (Kwasinski, 2010) has shown that one 
cannot treat each asset in isolation, but must rather look at the communication 
system as a system of systems and analyze how they work together.  In previous 
disasters, the cause of system failures has been, in order of frequency:  
 Overloaded capacity from too many calls; 
 Loss of power;  
 Failure of local power generation (backup systems at individual sites); 
and 
 Damage to equipment and tower at local sites. 
This section examines vulnerabilities of telecommunication networks and provides 
recommendations for improvements, with the goal of restoring and maintaining 
economic vitality after a severe earthquake.  
In order to address the issues posed by the vulnerabilities in the communications 
system, and to further the efforts of this Report, Mayor Garcetti convened a 
Communications Task Force that met multiple times in 2014.  The Task Force included 
leaders in private industry and government.  The Task Force discussed these 
vulnerabilities and recommended approaches to fixing these issues.   
74 
 
Coverage and Bandwidth 
Issue 
Historically, telephone services are overwhelmed by high demand immediately after 
an earthquake.  The disaster increases the need for communication and the system 
is not designed for simultaneous high usage.  Any reduction in capabilities that result 
from earthquake damage will compound the communication problem. 
Background 
Telecommunication networks consist of multiple components.  One of the most basic 
is a cell or node.  A cell is composed of a telecommunication structure that is either 
affixed or freestanding, a communication shelter that houses ground equipment, and 
an area surrounding the site that provides the cellular service known as coverage 
(Stuber, 2002).   Cells provide a specified range of coverage per unit and come in 
various sizes: 
 Macrocells, which service just over half a mile to twelve miles, are 
primarily used in rural settings; and 
 Microcells, which service less than a mile in range, are primarily used in 
urban areas (Stuber, 2002). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4-1. Macrocell coverage is indicated in 
blue, while microcell coverage is featured in 
 orange. Source: Qualcomm. 
 
Microcells predominate in urban 
areas, such as the City of Los Angeles, because they can increase user capacity 
75 
 
with smaller cell sites, maintain reliability of those cells, and use less power at each 
site (Ohaneme et al., 2012).  The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) allocates 
a certain range of frequencies to each private service provider, such as AT&T, 
Verizon, Sprint, or T-Mobile.  Each provider can distribute their range of frequencies 
in a manner that is suitable for their operation (Federal Communications Commission, 
2014). 
Particularly in urban areas, accessible locations determine how wireless providers use 
their respective frequency allotments.  Wireless providers do not usually own 
telecommunication structures outright, and instead lease tower space for their 
equipment.  Providers maintain their own cells, which transmit and receive specific 
frequencies, and reassign a set of frequencies from their allotted bandwidth to cells 
in other areas that are not in close proximity (Stuber, 2002). 
Each cell can only handle a limited amount of voice and data based on the FCC 
and provider allotted bandwidth (Sirbu, 1992).  Therefore, when one frequency 
becomes overloaded, due to a spike in use or damaged tower or equipment, as 
can be the case in an earthquake, providers may open bandwidth on another 
frequency to accommodate excess traffic.   
Recommendation 
Partnerships with Service Providers.  The City should enter into a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) with cellular service providers to maximize access to 
telecommunication coverage in a disaster.  A sample of this MOU is attached as 
Appendix E.  
Prior to the release of this Report, the City began work to develop Memoranda of 
Understanding with wireless cellular providers, which will provide that during declared 
disasters:  
The wireless cellular providers will:  
 Share bandwidth, allowing users to access bandwidth available from other 
providers; and 
 
 For those providers offering Wi-Fi-service, allow free temporary Wi-Fi access in 
public locations to reduce congestion.   
  
76 
 
The City will: 
 Facilitate access and other requirements for rapid repair of damaged facilities 
after an earthquake; and 
 
 Educate the public about effective communication strategies, such as texting 
instead of calling, to reduce bandwidth usage and congestion during a 
disaster. 
  
77 
 
 
Power for Communications Towers 
Issue 
A large earthquake will physically 
damage the electrical transmission 
system and cause many cell sites to lose 
power (Jones et al., 2008).  The duration 
of the power outage may exceed the 
backup power at cell sites, further 
exacerbating communication problems. 
Background 
The electric grid provides the primary 
source of power to telecommunication 
facilities, leaving them dependent on grid 
operability and vulnerable to even 
distant electric interruption.  After a 
disaster, large sections of the power grid 
can be shut down for repair or as a 
precautionary measure to ensure 
additional damage is not sustained 
through disconnected live wires (Walsh, 
2012).  Loss of power has caused 
substantial disruption of Figure 4-2. Powerline tower severely damaged 
telecommunications for days to weeks in by offset on the Emerson Fault in the 1992 
Hurricane Katrina (Kwasinski, 2010), the magnitude 7.3 Landers earthquake. The fault 
moved the left side of the tower 11 feet to the 
Tohoku, Japan earthquake (Carafano, right of the right side of the tower. Photo by 
2011), and Superstorm Sandy (Kwasinski, California Geological Survey. 
2013).  
As an example, approximately two million New Yorkers lost power following 
Hurricane Sandy (New York City Mayors Office, 2013).  According to U.S. 
Department of Energy (DOE) data, and an analysis performed by the Associated 
Press and Ventyx, power was out in parts of the New York region for 13 days 
(Fahey, 2012).  In New York City, an average of 25% of cell sites in the affected area 
lost service directly due to power loss (Kwasinski, 2013). 
78 
 
Power restoration can be a lengthy and complex process, involving coordination 
between government agencies and private sector businesses.  To further complicate 
matters for the City of Los Angeles, the Citys power supply is contingent upon 
numerous entities and is not exclusively under the control of the Citys Department of 
Water and Power. 
Several of the States major transmission lines are owned by Southern California 
Edison and overseen by the California Independent System Operator (ISO), which is 
an independent grid operator responsible for more than 26,000 miles of power lines 
and a significant wholesale power market.  These lines cross the San Andreas Fault 
at locations that are likely to have very large offsets; the fault at these locations is 
likely to move a greater distance than there is slack in the lines.  Their capacity is so 
large that their failure has the potential to bring down the power grid across 
Southern California and beyond.  Furthermore, the major natural gas supply line 
crosses two petroleum product pipelines at the San Andreas in Cajon Pass.  A large 
explosion and fire is likely to occur if all three pipelines break simultaneously (Jones et 
al., 2008).  A disruption in the natural gas supply will make it difficult to maintain 
electrical service, since local generating plants operate on natural gas and 
transmission lines cross the San Andreas Fault. 
Even if transmission lines across the San Andreas are unaffected, outages can occur 
on a more local level.  To protect against such outages, telecommunication 
providers install backup power at cell towers, including the use of backup batteries 
and generators.   
Because cell transmitters require air conditioning to function correctly, they have a 
large power draw and, therefore, batteries only provide four to eight hours of 
backup power.  Some critical facilities use a generator that can provide 48 hours of 
backup power.  Generators along with their air conditioning units require more 
space to house this equipment, which is not always practical in urban environments 
such as Los Angeles.  Furthermore, the cell site power requirements are so large that 
solar power is not a reasonable option at this stage.  Keeping cell tower generators 
running beyond two days will require transportation to the cell sites in order to bring 
the needed fuel and repair crews needed, but this could be challenging following a 
major earthquake. 
 
 
Recommendation 
79 
 
Wi-Fi Alternative.  Develop solar-powered Citywide Wi-Fi to provide a 
telecommunications alternative that uses less power and will allow Internet access in 
a time when the cell system is disrupted. 
The City has proposed to develop the Los Angeles Community Broadband Network 
(LACBN) (City of Los Angeles Information Technology Agency, 2014), to ensure that 
all residents and businesses have Internet access with high speed capability in the 
City of Los Angeles (City of Los Angeles Information Technology Agency, 2014).  This 
project will add to the resilience of Los Angeles because:  
 Wi-Fi transmitters use much less power than a cell phone transmitter, especially 
because the latter requires air conditioning at the ground facility;   
 If the City Wi-Fi system is designed with solar-powered transmitters, Internet 
connections and backup power, these Wi-Fi connections would provide an 
alternative communication option for the Citys residents;   
 A resilient network would provide free temporary Wi-Fi access immediately 
following a disaster in public locations such as schools, parks and recreation 
centers; and 
 Citywide Wi-Fi reduces dependency on the electric grid for the City of Los 
Angeles.  
Protect the Power System at Fault Crossings.  Create a Southern California Utility 
Resilience Task Force to develop solutions to the potential for cascading failures in 
the interacting utilities as they cross the San Andreas Fault.  This project will add to 
the resilience of Los Angeles because:   
 Los Angeles is part of the regional Southern California community that will 
collectively be impacted by any earthquake;  
 The utilities are interconnected in their ability to make their communities resilient, 
but they belong to many different entities, public and private, that will need to 
cooperate to find solutions to the problems; and  
 This issue is the collective responsibility of State and local leaders, and they are in 
the best position to look for approaches to protect and prepare for the 
predictable damage that will happen at the fault crossings. 
  
80 
 
Physical Infrastructure 
Issue 
Cellular towers are designed and constructed to life-safety standards, meaning that 
they are designed to be unlikely to collapse, but need not be functional following an 
earthquake.  Interruptions due to physical damage can create lengthy delays in 
response and recovery.  Debris, downed bridges, and other hazards further create 
complications for repairing this infrastructure in a timely manner particularly following 
a catastrophic event.   
Background 
Cellular towers consist of freestanding towers and towers affixed to buildings.  The 
type of structure depends on several factors including availability of electric power, 
electromagnetic interferences, wind exposure, topography, aviation routes and 
requirements, transportation networks, and local zoning ordinances.  
In urban areas like Los Angeles, there is limited open space for freestanding towers, 
which requires that more than half of telecommunication structures are affixed to 
buildings.  Older buildings, which are more likely to collapse, often house the cell 
phone towers.   
Telecommunications can be easily lost if a building experiences serious damage.  In 
the 2011 Haiti earthquake, an estimated 3,000,000 Haitians were suddenly without cell 
phone service because of the widespread building damage (Gould et al, 2011). 
Thus, freestanding telecommunication structures become critical in maintaining cell 
phone service following an earthquake.  They vary in height from 50 to 200 feet, 
depending on structural specifications and coverage capability, with four types of 
design (guyed towers, lattice towers, stealth towers, and monopoles) (Harris, 2011).  
Monopoles, simple poles of concrete or steel, are the most common type used by 
private service providers within the City of Los Angeles.  
The basic strength requirement depends on local conditions and includes various 
load sources such as wind, ice, and seismic activity (Telecommunications Industry 
Association, 2009).  The seismic strength to which telecommunication structures are 
built depends on several factors, including intended use and occupancy (American 
Society of Civil Engineers, 2002).  For earthquakes, the building code uses the 
National Seismic Hazard Maps to determine what level of ground shaking has at 
81 
 
least a 10% chance of occurring in 50 years.  Given those loads, the towers are 
designed to prevent collapse and preserve the safety of people.  For the less likely 
but possible earthquake (called the maximum credible earthquake), the structure 
should not suffer complete collapse, but enough damage to hinder its ability to 
perform is expected. 
For some structures, such as fire stations and 
emergency operation centers, public policy has 
determined that the structure should be strong 
enough to do more than just remain standing, 
but to remain functional following an earthquake.  
This design goal is accomplished by using an 
importance factor, a strength multiplier that 
reflects the need to keep the most critical 
structures functioning after an earthquake.  
Towers used for critical public safety 
communications and other public safety buildings 
are given an Importance Factor of 1.5, but most 
private towers have an importance factor of 1.0.  
The experience in small to moderate 
earthquakes is not a good model for 
understanding the behavior of cell towers in the 
largest earthquakes because the resonant 
frequency of a tall tower is low.   
Figure 4-3. Telecommunications tower 
 in Tokyo, damaged in the 2011 Tohoku 
magnitude 9 earthquake. 
This means that the seismic energy most likely to  
damage the tower is from the low frequency 
waves that are only generated by the largest earthquakes.   
Looking at other countries where very large earthquakes have occurred, we see not 
just the collapse of the cell phone system in Haiti, but also the loss of 2,300 towers in 
the earthquake in China in 2008 (New York Times, 2008).   
This is a helpful comparison because the Chinese Building Code has similarities to 
International Building Code, in that: 1) design criteria for the shaking from 
earthquakes with 10% and 2% exceedance probabilities in 50 years (in other words, 
that there is a 2% probability of an earthquake of this magnitude occurring in 50 
82 
 
years) (You and Zhao, 2013); 2) the equivalent of the Importance Factor is Seismic 
Fortification Categories with Category A buildings (critical facilities) required to build 
to at least one unit with higher seismic intensity, which is approximately 50% greater 
strength; and 3) mobile communications facilities are in general Category C, which is 
the same as an Importance Factor of 1.0 (Tang, 2009).  Therefore, based on the 
Chinese example, we can expect cell towers currently built to the importance factor 
of 1.0 to not be resilient when a large-scale earthquake strikes.   
Retrofitting existing towers to a higher seismic standard can be expensive, with costs 
estimated to be as expensive as a new tower.  According to the Los Angeles 
Bureau of Engineering, building new towers to a higher standard is much more 
practical, resulting in an additional cost of 10-20%.  
Recommendation 
Stronger Cell Towers.  The City should amend its building code to require new 
freestanding cellular communication towers to be built with an Importance Factor of 
1.5.  Existing towers would not be affected.   
83 
 
Earthquake Early Warning 
Issue 
The California Integrated Seismic Network has a prototype system to rapidly detect 
seismic waves as an earthquake happens, calculate the maximum expected shaking, 
and send alerts to surrounding communities before damaging shaking arrives.  This 
system is referred to as Earthquake Early Warning or EEW (USGS, 2014).  This 
information could be used to reduce losses in an earthquake, but because of limited 
funding, the current system is still in development and has occasional false alarms.  
Nevertheless, this system could be of great benefit to Los Angeles in building seismic 
resilience.   
Background 
Earthquakes do not happen at epicenters.  They begin at hypocenters, but the 
seismic slip happens over a surface and every point on that surface radiates energy.  
The size of that surface determines the magnitude of the earthquake.  In the largest 
earthquakes, strong shaking can be tens to even hundreds of miles from the 
epicenter, because it is still near the fault.  
Technology can detect earthquakes and provide an alert that is sent to some areas 
before strong shaking arrives.  An EEW system seeks to identify and characterize an 
earthquake a few seconds after it begins, calculate the likely intensity of ground 
shaking that will result, and deliver warnings to people likely to experience the 
shaking.  This can be done by detecting the P-waves, the first energy to radiate 
from an earthquake that rarely causes damage, and using that to estimate the 
location and the magnitude of the earthquake.  Next, the anticipated ground shaking 
across the affected region is estimated and a warning is generated.  This method 
can provide warnings before the later and stronger S-wave arrives in a region. 
EEW in California could range from a few seconds to a few tens of seconds, 
depending on the distance to the epicenter of the earthquake.  For a very large 
earthquake like those expected on the San Andreas Fault, the warning time could be 
much longer because the affected area is much larger.  
The ShakeAlert EEW system has been developed for the West Coast by scientists of 
the USGS, Caltech, and U.C. Berkeley.  The ShakeAlert system has been sending live 
alerts to test users since January 2012.  In Southern California, the Los Angeles-Long 
Beach Urban Areas Security Initiative (UASI) supported the development of the 
84 
 
network by funding the addition of 125 stations to the Southern California portion of 
the network, resulting in Southern California being the first region in the United States 
with a density of stations that can support EEW.  However, the system needs 
continued development to ensure more robust information is available before being 
publicly accessible.  
Figure 4-4. Illustration of how Earthquake Early Warning works. (Source: USGS; Credit: Staff, Orange 
County Register) 
  
85 
 
Recommendation 
Advancement of Earthquake Early Warning.  The City of Los Angeles and the USGS 
should begin to implement Early Earthquake Warning in Southern California.  They 
should work together to convert the prototype into a fully functional and robust EEW 
system.  This should include developing an expanded EEW program within the Los 
Angeles Fire Department and the Los Angeles Unified School District, so that the 
warning signal can be used to open fire station doors and signal to school children 
to Drop, Cover, Hold On.  
In addition, the City of Los Angeles should work with Congressional Representatives 
to support a robust Earthquake Early Warning system in California.   
  
86 
 
 
References 
American Society of Civil Engineers. (2002). Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures. 
Retrieved from https://law.resource.org/puv/us/cfr/ibr/003/asce.7.2002.pdf 
California Building Standards Commission. (2013). California Building Code, Title 24. Retrieved from 
www.ecodes.biz/ecodes_support/free_resources/2013California/13Building/PDFs/Chapter%2031%20-
%20Special%20Construction.pdf.  
Carafano, J. J. (2011). The Great Eastern Japan Earthquake. The Heritage Foundation. Retrieved from 
http://report.heritage.org/sr0094. 
City of Los Angeles Information Technology Agency. (2014). Request for Information (RFI): LA 
Community Broadband Network (LACBN) Initiative. Retrieved from: 

Fahey, J. (2012, November 16). Power Outage Time After Sandy Not Extraordinary. Associated Press. 
Retrieved from http://bigstory.ap.org/article/power-outage-time-after-sandy-not-extraordinary.  
Federal Communications Commission. (2014). Radio Spectrum Allocation. Retrieved from 
http://www.fcc.gov/encyclopedia/radio-spectrum-allocation.  
Gould, Nathan, Barry J. Goodno, Phillip L. Gould, and Philip Caldwell (2011) Effects of the January 2010 
Haitian Earthquake on Selected Equipment and the Implications for the Seismic Design of Critical 
Non-Structural Components Required for Post-Earthquake Recovery Operations in Developing 
Countries. Structures Congress 2011: pp. 2275-2284. doi: 10.1061/41171(401)197.  
Harris, Michael. (2011). How Cell Towers Work.  Union Site Management. Retrieved from 
http://www.unisonsite.com/pdf/resource-center/How%20Towers%20Work.pdf.  
Jones, L. M., Bernknopf, R., Cox, D., Goltz, J., Hudnut, K., Mileti, D., Perry, S., Ponti, D., Porter, K., Reichle, 
M., Seligson, H., Shoaf, K., Treiman, J., & Wein, A. (2008). The ShakeOut Scenario: U.S. Geological 
Survey Open-File Report 2008-1150 and California Geological Survey Preliminary Report 25. Retrieved 
from http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2008/1150/.  
Kwasinski, A. (2010) Analysis of Vulnerabilities of Telecommunication Systems to Natural Disasters, 2010 
IEEE Systems Conference, pp. 359-364, San Diego, CA, USA, April 5-8, 2010. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SYSTEMS.2010.5482356.  
Kwasinski, A., & Tang, A. K. (2012). Telecommunications Performance in the M-9.0 Offshore East Coast 
of Japan Earthquake and Tsunami, March 11, 2011. Proceedings of the International Symposium on 
Engineering Lessons Learned from the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake, Tokyo, Japan, 1514-1525. 
Retrieved from http://nisee.berkeley.edu/elibrary/Text/2012041210.  
Kwasinski, A. (2013). Lessons from Field Damage Assessments about Communication Networks Power 
Supply and Infrastructure Performance during Natural Disaster with a focus on Hurricane Sandy. The 
University of Texas at Austin. Retrieved from 
87 
 
http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~kwasinski/1569715143%20Kwasinski%20paper%20FCC-
NR2013%20submitted.pdf.  
New York City Mayors Office. (2013). Hurricane Sandy After Action Report: Report and 
Recommendations. Retrieved from 
http://www.nyc.gov/html/recovery/downloads/pdf/sandy_aar_5.2.13.pdf.  
New York Times. (2008). Powerful Quake Ravages China, Killing Thousands, Retrieved from 
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/05/13/world/asia/13china.html?pagewanted=all&_r=1&.  
Ohanami, C., Onoh, G., Ifeagwu, E.,  & Eneh, I. (2012). Improving Channel Capacity of Cellular System 
Using Cell Splitting. International Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research. Retrieved from 
http://www.ijser.org/researchpaper%5CIMPROVING-CHANNEL-CAPACITY-OF-A-CELLULAR-SYSTEM-
USING-CELL-SPLITTING.pdf.  
Pew Research Center. (2014A). Internet Use Over Time. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/data-trend/internet-use/internet-use-over-time/.  
Pew Research Center. (2014B). Mobile Technology Fact Sheet. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/mobile-technology-fact-sheet/.  
Sirbu, M. A. (1992). Technology and Infrastructure. Retrieved from 
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/andrew/usr9/sirbu/www/pubs/ipaper_ToC.html.  
Stuber, G. L. (2002). Principles of Mobile Communication, Second Edition. New York: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. Retrieved from http://www.eletrica.ufpr.br/graduacao/e-
books/Principles%20of%20Mobile%20Communication.pdf.  
Tang, A. (2008). The ShakeOut Scenario Supplemental Study: Telecommunications. U.S. Geological 
Survey. Retrieved from 
http://books.google.com/books?id=sVYE6M3urJQC&pg=PA10&lpg=PA10&dq=shakeout+congestion&source
=bl&ots=mlKLsq-Nl-&sig=47Mu1EdlyGQpI1fuzp2I5-bMTno&hl=en&sa=X&ei=a6nOU9XbIY-
JogSEroKYDw&ved=0CCAQ6AEwAQ#v=onepage&q=shakeout%20 congestion &f=false 
Tang, A. (2009). TCLEE 2009: Lifeline Earthquake Engineering in a Multihazard Environment: pp. 1-
9 Telecommunications PerformanceMay 2008, Wenchuan, Sichuan Earthquake, (doi: 
10.1061/41050(357)132). 
Telecommunications Industry Association. (2009). TIA-222-G: Structural Standard for Antenna 
Supporting Structures and Antennas. 
U.S. Geological Survey. (1996). USGS Response to an Urban Earthquake Northridge 94. Retrieved from 
http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/1996/ofr-96-0263/.  
United States Geological Survey. (2014d). Earthquake Early Warning. Retrieved from 
http://www.shakealert.org.  
United States Geological Survey. (2014E). ShakeCast. Earthquake Hazards Program. Retrieved from 
88 
 
http://earthquake.usgs.gov/research/software/shakecast/. 
Walsh, B. (2012). Hurricane Sandy Will Put a Rickety Power Grid to the Test. TIME. Retrieved from 
http://science.time.com/2012/10/30/hurricane-sandy-will-put-a-rickety-power-grid-to-the-test/. 
World Wide Web Consortium. (2014). A Little History of the World Wide Web. Retrieved from: 
http://www.w3.org/History.html. 
You Hongbing and Zhao Fengxin, (2013). A Comparison of Domestic and Foreign Seismic Fortification 
Standards for Electrical Equipment, Earthquake Research in China, Volume 27Number 4, 2013.  
 
 
 
 
  
89 
 
 
List of Recommendations 
 
Strengthen Our Buildings 
 
Mandatory Retrofit of Soft-First-Story Buildings. Mandate retrofit of soft-first-story 
buildings to make the first floor as strong as the second. 
 
Mandatory Retrofit of Concrete Buildings.  Mandate that concrete buildings designed 
prior to the enactment of the 1976 Uniform Building Code meet the Basic Safety 
Objective (BSO) in the AFSCME 41. 
Mandatory Retrofit of Buildings that are Excessively Damaged in Earthquakes.  
Mandate retrofitting of buildings that incur excessive damage in a low level of 
earthquake shaking (less than 40%g on the USGS ShakeMap).   
 
Adoption of a Back to Business Program: Adopt a Back to Business Program to 
supplement the capacity of the Citys building inspection force in the event of a 
major earthquake.    
 
Voluntary Ratings of Buildings.  Adoption and implementation of a voluntary rating 
system, utilizing the system designed by the United States Resiliency Council.   
 
 
 
  
90 
 
Fortify Our Water System 
 
Alternative Water System.  LAFD and LADWP should develop a resilient and 
alternative water system for firefighting purposes.   
 
Protect the Los Angeles Aqueduct.  Identify mitigation alternatives for the Los 
Angeles Aqueduct crossing the San Andreas Fault.   
 
Protect the Other Aqueducts.  Create a Seismic Resilience Water Supply Task Force 
with the DWP, California MWD, and the DWR, in an effort to create a collaborative 
and regional approach to protecting the resilience of our water supply. 
 
Protect Water Storage.  Ensure that DWP dams are maintained in a safe and 
reliable manner to both ensure a reliable water supply and to ensure public safety in 
the event of an earthquake. 
 
Develop Local Water.  The 2010 Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP) to develop 
local water supplies through storm water capture, water conservation, and water 
recycling should be actively pursued.   
 
Seismic Resilient Pipe Network.  DWP should commit to a future water system with a 
seismically resilient pipe network. 
 
LADWP Resilience by Design Program.  Establish a Resilience by Design Program at 
the highest level of DWP, covering both the power and water systems to promote 
an institutional emphasis on seismic resilience as a core function of DWP.   
 
Seismic Resilience Bond Measure.  Work with local, regional, and state partners to 
develop a seismic resilience bond measure to allow for necessary investments in the 
seismic safety of our region.   
 
 
  
91 
 
Enhance Reliable Telecommunications 
 
Partnerships with Service Providers.  The City should enter into a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) with cellular service providers to maximize access to 
telecommunication coverage in a disaster.   
 
Wi-Fi Alternative.  Develop solar-powered Citywide Wi-Fi to provide a 
telecommunications alternative that uses less power and will allow Internet access in 
a time when the cell system is disrupted. 
 
Protect the Power System at Fault Crossings.  Create a Southern California Utility 
Resilience Task Force to develop solutions to the potential for cascading failures in 
the interacting utilities as they cross the San Andreas Fault.   
 
Stronger Cell Towers.  The City should amend its building code to require new 
freestanding cellular communication towers to be built with an Importance Factor of 
1.5.  Existing towers would not be affected. 
 
Advancement of Earthquake Early Warning.  The City of Los Angeles and the USGS 
should begin to implement Early Earthquake Warning in Southern California. In 
addition, the City of Los Angeles should work with Congressional Representatives to 
support a robust Earthquake Early Warning system in California.   
 
  
92 
 
 
Summary of Potential Resilience Incentives 
 
During the course of this project, the Seismic Safety Task Force discussed a number 
of programs that could be adopted in order to ensure the successful implementation 
of the recommendations.  We recognize that these suggested programs require 
thorough analysis and discussion by the Mayor, the City Council, and the Los 
Angeles community prior to adoption.  We also recognize that these programs were 
beyond the scope of the Task Force to fully analyze and recommend. Nevertheless, 
we offer these suggestions as a way to begin the discussion on the incentive 
programs that will be needed.  These programs can include:  
 Providing access to private lending sources based on the PACE financing 
program for soft-first story retrofits.  
 
 Waiving fees required by the Department of Building and Safety and the 
Department of City Planning for permits and variances associated with 
mandatory retrofit work.  
 
 Allowing a reduction of up to 20% in required parking for the necessary loss 
of parking associated with soft-first-story retrofits.  
 
 Establishing a 5-year exemption from Business Tax for businesses that move 
into newly retrofitted buildings.  
 
 Establishing a policy by which, if in the rare instance that a building must be 
demolished, an owner demolishes and replaces a concrete building 
determined to require retrofit, the new building may be built with the same 
entitlements.  
 
 Offering a business tax credit or exemption for those retrofitting and/or those 
who build a structure above the minimum code requirements.  
 
 Working with State to determine feasibility of easing CEQA requirements for 
projects associated with concrete building retrofit work.  
 
 Working with the Los Angeles City Council, partner Cities, and State legislators 
to develop a resilience bond measure to assist in expediting the funding 
available for the replacement of key water and communications infrastructure, 
93 
 
and other appropriate resilience projects.   
 
 Reviewing provisions under the rent stabilization ordinance addressing cost 
sharing between landlords and tenants to determine if these provisions require 
adjustment to protect low-income tenants. 
  
94 
 
 
Appendix A 
 
MANDATORY EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING WOOD FRAME 
BUILDINGS WITH SOFT, WEAK OR OPEN WALLS 
Ordinance No. _______, Effective ________ 
 
I. PURPOSE 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the public welfare and safety by 
reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes 
on existing wood-frame buildings with soft, weak or open walls. In the Northridge 
Earthquake, many multi-story wood frame buildings with tuck under parking 
performed poorly and collapsed. These types of buildings were shown to be 
vulnerable to loss of human life, personal injury and property damage during past 
earthquakes. Common deficiencies of this building type have been identified to be 
soft, weak or open walls. This Ordinance creates minimum standards to mitigate 
hazards from these deficiencies. When fully followed, these minimum standards will 
improve the performance of these buildings but will not necessarily prevent all 
earthquake-related damage.  
 
II. SCOPE 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all existing commercial and residential 
buildings of wood frame construction, except residential buildings with 3 units or less, 
having all the following: 
1. Two or more stories, 
2. Determined by the Department to have been built and issued a Certificate of 
Occupancy before January 1, 1980, and 
3. Ground floor portion of the wood frame structure contains parking or other similar 
open floor space that causes soft, weak or open wall lines.  
95 
 
 
III. DEFINITIONS 
The following definitions shall apply for the purposes of this Ordinance: 
CRIPPLE WALL is a wood-framed stud wall extending from the top of the foundation 
wall to the underside of the lowest floor framing of the building. 
GROUND FLOOR is any floor within the wood frame portion of a building whose 
elevation is immediately accessible from an adjacent grade by vehicles or 
pedestrians. The ground floor portion of the structure does not include any level that 
is completely below adjacent grades. 
OPEN WALL LINE is an exterior wall line with vertical elements of the lateral force 
resisting system which requires tributary seismic forces to be resisted by diaphragm 
rotation or excessive cantilever beyond parallel lines of shear walls. Diaphragms that 
cantilever more than twenty-five percent of the distance between lines of lateral 
force resisting elements from which the diaphragm cantilevers shall be considered 
excessive. Exterior exit balconies of six feet or less in width shall not be considered 
excessive cantilevers. 
RETROFIT is an improvement of the lateral force resisting system by alteration of 
existing structural elements or addition of new structural elements. 
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING is any building which contains living facilities, including 
provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, as required by this code, for 
not more than one family. 
SOFT WALL LINE is a wall line whose lateral stiffness is less than required by story 
drift limitations or deformation compatibility requirements of this Ordinance. In lieu of 
analysis, this may be defined as a wall line in a story where the story stiffness is less 
than 70 percent of the story above for the direction under consideration. 
STORY is as defined in the building code, including any basement or underfloor 
space of a building with cripple walls exceeding four feet in height. 
STORY STRENGTH is the total strength of all seismic resisting elements sharing the 
same story shear in the direction under consideration. 
WALL LINE is any length of a wall along a principal axis of the building used to 
provide resistance to lateral loads.  
96 
 
WEAK WALL LINE is a wall line in a story where the story strength is less than 80 
percent of the story above in the direction under consideration.  
 
IV. COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS 
Priority designation. Buildings within the scope of this Ordinance shall be recognized 
with the  
priority designation as follows: 
I. Residential Buildings with 16 units or more. 
II. Buildings with 3 stories or more (other than buildings under Priority I). 
III. All others  
The owner of each building within the scope of this Ordinance shall cause a 
structural analysis to be made of the building by a civil or structural engineer or 
architect licensed by the state of California, and if the building does not meet the 
minimum earthquake standards specified in this Ordinance, the building shall be 
structurally altered to conform to such standards or be demolished within the time 
limits stated in this Ordinance. 
Service of order. When the Department determines that a building is within the 
scope of this Ordinance, the Department shall issue an order to the owner of the 
building with the minimum time period for service of such orders. The minimum time 
period for the service of such orders shall be measured from the order effective 
date.  
Buildings not served an order to comply with this Ordinance shall not invalidate any 
proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such 
person from any duty or obligation imposed by this Ordinance. 
This Ordinance does not require existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire 
systems to be altered unless they constitute a hazard to life or property. 
Unless expressly stated herein, this Ordinance is not intended to amend, repeal, or 
supersede provisions of the Los Angeles Municipal Code. In any specific section or 
case where there is a conflict within or between or among provisions, the most 
restrictive which prescribes and establishes the higher standard of safety or public 
97 
 
benefit shall prevail and control. 
Time limit. 
A. The owner of a building within the scope of this Ordinance shall comply with the 
requirements set forth above by submitting to the Department for review and 
approval within one (1) year after the service of the order: 
1. A structural analysis and plans which shall demonstrate the building, as is, meets 
the minimum requirements of this Ordinance, or 
2. A structural analysis and plans for the proposed structural alteration of the 
building necessary to comply with the minimum requirements of this Ordinance, or 
3. Plans for the demolition of the building. 
B. Obtain all necessary permits, within two (2) years after receipt of the order, for 
rehabilitation or demolition. 
C. All construction or demolition work under all necessary permits shall be completed 
within four (4) years after receipt of the order. 
Appeal from order. The owner or person in charge or control of the building may 
appeal the Departments initial determination that the building is within the scope of 
this Ordinance to the Board of Building and Safety Commissioners. Such appeal shall 
be filed with the Board within 60 days from the service date of the order. Any such 
appeal shall be decided by the Board no later than 60 days after the date that the 
appeal is filed. Such appeal shall be made in writing upon appropriate forms 
provided therefor by the Department, and the grounds thereof shall be stated 
clearly and concisely.  
 Appeals or requests for slight modifications from any other determinations, orders 
or actions by the Department pursuant to this Ordinance shall be made in 
accordance with the procedures established in Section 98.0403.2 of the Los Angeles 
Municipal Code. 
Recordation. At the time that the Department serves the aforementioned order, the 
Department shall file with the Office of the County Recorder a certificate stating that 
the subject building is within the scope of this Ordinance. The certificate shall also 
state that the owner thereof has been ordered to structurally analyze and to 
structurally alter or demolish the building when the Department determines the 
building is not in compliance with this Ordinance. 
98 
 
If the building is either demolished, found not to be within the scope of this 
Ordinance, or is structurally capable of resisting minimum seismic forces required by 
this Ordinance as a result of structural alterations or an analysis, the Department 
shall file with the Office of the County Recorder a certificate terminating the status of 
the subject building as being classified within the scope of this Ordinance. 
Enforcement and penalty. If the owner or other person in charge or control of the 
subject building fails to comply with any order issued by the Department pursuant to 
this Ordinance within any of the time limits, the Department may order that the 
entire building or a portion thereof be vacated and that the building or a portion 
thereof remain vacated until such order has been complied with. If compliance with 
such order has not been accomplished within 90 days after the date the building 
has been ordered vacated or such additional time as may have been granted by 
the Board, the Superintendent may order its demolition in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 8903 of Building Code. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, it shall be unlawful 
for any person, firm, or corporation to maintain, use, or occupy any building within 
the scope of this division which does not meet the minimum earthquake standards 
specified in this division. 
 Any person who violates, causes or permits another person to violate this provision 
is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person includes an owner, lessor, sublessor, manager 
or person in control of a building subject to this ordinance. This term shall not 
include any person who is merely a tenant or other individual occupying any 
dwelling unit, efficiency dwelling unit, guest room or suite in a building. The legal 
owner of a building is that person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity 
whose name or title appears on the record with the Office of the County Recorder, 
as well as all successors or assignees of these persons. 
EXCEPTION: This section shall not apply to any building on which work is proceeding 
in compliance with any extensions of time granted by the Department; or any 
action, order or determination made by the Department in the implementation of this 
ordinance 
Occupant and tenant advisory. The property owner shall advise all current and 
prospective residential occupants and non-residential tenants of the building in a 
method and written format approved by the Housing and Community Investment 
Department. 
99 
 
Historical buildings. Qualified historical buildings shall comply with requirements of the 
California Historical Building Code established under Part 8, Title 24 of the California 
Code Regulations. 
V. ENGINEERING ANALYSIS 
Scope of analysis. This Ordinance requires the alteration, repair, replacement or 
addition of structural elements and their connections to meet the strength and 
stiffness requirements herein. The lateral-load-path analysis shall include the resisting 
elements and connections from the wood diaphragm immediately above any weak 
or open wall lines to the foundation. Stories above the weak wall line shall be 
considered in the analysis but need not be modified.  
Design base shear and design parameters. The design base shear in a given 
direction shall be 0.20 W, where W is the tributary mass of the structure above the 
soft story and W shall be as defined in ASCE 7 Section 12.14.8.1. 
Lateral Vertical Systems. Strengthening systems with concrete walls or masonry walls, 
or steel braced frame shall be not be permitted. 
Horizontal Structural Irregularities in buildings with 3 or more stories. Structures with 3 
or more stories having horizontal structural irregularities of either type 2, 3, 4, or 5 
listed in ASCE 7 Table 12.3-1, shall be designated to meet the additional requirements 
of those sections referenced in the table 12.3-1 for the entire story with weak or open 
wall lines. 
Alternate analysis, base shear and design parameters. The Department may 
approve alternate design methodologies that improve the whole first story seismic 
performance that are equivalent to the life safety objectives in this ordinance. 
Additional anchorage requirements for buildings on hillsides. Where any portion of a 
building within the scope of this Ordinance is constructed on or into a slope steeper 
than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33-percent slope), the lateral-force-
resisting system shall be analyzed for the effects of concentrated lateral forces at 
and below the base level diaphragm shall also be analyzed for the effects of 
concentrated lateral loads caused at the building base from the hillside conditions 
and comply with the provisions of Chapter 94 of the Los Angeles Building Code. 
Story drift limitations. The calculated story drift for each retrofitted story shall not 
exceed the allowable deformation compatible with all vertical load-resisting elements 
and 0.025 times the story height. The calculated story drift shall not be reduced by 
100 
 
the effects of horizontal diaphragm stiffness but shall be increased when these 
effects produce rotation. Drift calculations shall be in accordance with ASCE 7-10 
requirements. 
Pole structures. The effects of rotation and soil stiffness shall be included in the 
calculated story drift where lateral loads are resisted by vertical elements whose 
required depth of embedment is determined by pole formulas. The coefficient of 
subgrade reaction used in deflection calculations shall be based on an approved 
geotechnical investigation conducted in accordance with approved geotechnical 
engineering reports. 
P-Delta effect. The requirements of the Los Angeles Building Code shall apply, 
except as modified herein. All structural framing elements and their connections not 
required by the design to be part of the lateral force resisting system shall be 
designed and/or detailed to be adequate to maintain support of design dead plus 
live loads when subject to the expected deformations caused by seismic forces. The 
stress analysis of cantilever columns shall use a buckling factor of 2.1 for the direction 
normal to the axis of the beam. 
Ties, continuity and collectors. All parts of the structure included in the scope of 
analysis shall be interconnected and the connection shall be capable of resisting the 
seismic force created by the parts being connected as required per the Los Angeles 
Building Code.  
VI. REQUIRED INFORMATION ON PLANS 
General. For existing and new construction, the plans and specifications shall be of 
sufficient clarity to indicate the nature, design methodology, and extent of the 
proposed work and to show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this 
Ordinance and the Los Angeles Building Code. 
Engineers or architects statement. The responsible engineer or architect shall provide 
the following statements on the approved plans: 
 1. I am responsible for designing this buildings seismic strengthening in compliance 
with the minimum regulations of the mandatory Wood Soft-Story Retrofit Ordinance 
(Ordinance No. ________). 
  
101 
 
Appendix B 
 
MANDATORY SEISMIC RETROFIT PROGRAM  
NON DUCTILE CONCRETE BUILDINGS 
 
 
OUTLINE 
 
I. PURPOSE 
II. SCOPE 
III. DEFINITIONS 
IV. COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS  
V. ENGINEERING ANALYSIS 
VI. FINANCING AND INCENTIVES  
 
 
 
 
  
102 
 
 
MANDATORY EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN 
EXISTING NON DUCTILE CONCRETE BUILDINGS 
Ordinance No. __________, Effective ______ 
   
 I. PURPOSE 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the public welfare and safety by 
reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes 
on existing concrete buildings. In the Northridge Earthquake, the Great Hanshin 
Earthquake, Japan, the Mexico City earthquake, and Christchurch New Zealand 
Earthquake, many concrete buildings constructed prior to the 1976 Los Angeles City 
Building Code provisions, or similar era codes in other countries, performed poorly 
and collapsed causing loss of human life, personal injury, and property damage. The 
poor performance of these older concrete buildings is typically due to deficiencies in 
the lateral force resisting system (beams, columns, and joints) that render the building 
incapable of sustaining gravity loads when the building is subjected to earthquake 
induced lateral displacements. This Ordinance creates timelines and minimum 
standards to mitigate hazards from these deficiencies. When fully followed, these 
minimum standards will improve the performance of these buildings but will not 
necessarily prevent all earthquake-related damage.  
 
II. SCOPE 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all existing concrete buildings, except 
detached single family dwellings, having been determined by the Department to 
have been permitted before January 1, 1980. 
III. DEFINITIONS 
The following definitions shall apply for the purposes of this Ordinance: 
CONCRETE BUILDING is a building having concrete floors and/or roofs, either with 
or without beams, supported by concrete walls and/or concrete columns, with or 
without masonry infills, and any combination thereof. 
MASONRY INFILL is the unreinforced or reinforced masonry wall construction within 
a reinforced concrete frame. 
103 
 
RETROFIT an improvement of the structural system by alteration of existing structural 
elements or addition of new structural elements. 
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING is any building which contains living facilities, including 
provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, as required by this code, for 
not more than one family. 
 IV. COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS 
Service of order.  When the Department determines that a building is within the 
scope of this Ordinance, the Department shall issue an order to the owner of the 
building within the minimum time period for service of such orders. 
The notice and order shall state the time limit stages the owner has to respond to 
the Department from the issuance date of the notice to the owner. 
Buildings not served an order to comply with this Ordinance shall not invalidate any 
proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such 
person from any duty or obligation imposed by this Ordinance. 
This Ordinance does not require existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire 
systems to be altered. 
Recordation.  At the time that the Department serves the aforementioned order, the 
Department shall file with the Office of the County Recorder a certificate stating that 
the subject building is within the scope of this Ordinance.  The certificate shall also 
state that the owner thereof has been ordered to structurally analyze and to 
structurally alter or demolish the building when the Department determines the 
building is not in compliance with this Ordinance. 
   If the building is either demolished, found not to be within the scope of this 
Ordinance, or is structurally capable of resisting minimum seismic forces required by 
this Ordinance as a result of structural alterations or an analysis, the Department 
shall file with the Office of the County Recorder a certificate terminating the status of 
the subject building as being classified within the scope of this Ordinance. 
Time limits.  
A.  The owner of a building within the scope of Ordinance shall comply with the 
requirements set forth above by submitting to the Department for review and 
approval within three years after the service of the order a completed checklist in 
the format and form provided by the Department. 
104 
 
B.  For buildings within the scope of the ordinance, the owner shall provide within 
5 years from the date of the original order, a detailed evaluation of the building 
documenting whether the building meets or exceeds the Engineering Analysis 
requirements of this ordinance. This detailed evaluation shall include either: 
1. Proof showing that the building was previously retrofitted to all provision in 
Chapters 85 or 95 of the Los Angeles Building Code. 
2. Proof showing that voluntarily retrofitted to the design criteria indicated in this 
ordinance. 
3. A report summarizing structural analysis results that indicate that the existing 
building meets the structural requirement of the Ordinance. 
4. A report summarizing structural analysis results and plans for the proposed 
structural alteration of the building necessary to comply with the minimum 
requirements of this Ordinance. 
5.  Plans for the demolition of the building. 
C.  Within 30 years from the date of the original notice order, demolition or 
retrofit of the building shall be complete.  
D. All buildings within the scope of this Ordinance that did not receive an order 
from the Department shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other 
person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed 
by this Code to complete all demolition or retrofit work by July 1, 2040. 
 Appeal from order.  The owner or person in charge or control of the building may 
appeal the Departments order that the building is within the scope of this Ordinance 
to the Board of Building and Safety Commissioners.  Such appeal shall be filed with 
the Board within 60 days from the service date of the order.  Such appeal shall be 
made in writing upon appropriate forms provided therefor by the Department, and 
the grounds thereof shall be stated clearly and concisely.   
   Appeals or requests for slight modifications from any other determinations, orders 
or actions by the Department pursuant to this Ordinance shall be made in 
accordance with the procedures established in Section 98.0403.2 of the Los Angeles 
Municipal Code. 
Enforcement and penalty.  If the owner or other person in charge or control of the 
subject building fails to comply with any order issued by the Department pursuant to 
105 
 
this Ordinance within any of the time limits, the Department may order that the 
entire building or a portion thereof be vacated and that the building or a portion 
thereof remain vacated until such order has been complied with.  If compliance with 
such order has not been accomplished within 90 days after the date the building 
has been ordered vacated or such additional time as may have been granted by 
the Board, the Superintendent may order its demolition in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 8903 of Building Code. 
Unless expressly stated herein, this Ordinance is not intended to amend, repeal, or 
supersede provisions of the Los Angeles Municipal Code. In any specific section or 
case where there is a conflict within or between or among provisions, the most 
restrictive which prescribes and establishes the higher standard of safety or public 
benefit shall prevail and control. 
Occupant and tenant advisory. The property owner shall advise all current and 
prospective residential occupants and non-residential tenants of the building in a 
method and written format approved by the Housing and Community Investment 
Department. 
Historical buildings. Qualified historical buildings shall comply with requirements of the 
California Historical Building Code established under Part 8, Title 24 of the California 
Code Regulations. 
V. ENGINEERING ANALYSIS 
Scope of analysis.  This Ordinance requires the alteration, repair, replacement or 
addition of structural elements and their connections to meet the following 
requirements:  
Building Structural Analysis, Design and Evaluation. The building shall meet one of the 
following criteria: 
1. Strength of the code conforming lateral resisting system shall meet or exceed 
seventy five percent (75%) of the base shear specified in the current Los Angeles 
Building Code seismic provisions. Elements not designated to be part of the lateral-
force resisting system shall be retrofitted to be adequate for gravity load effects and 
seismic displacement due to the full (100%) of the design story drift specified in the 
current Los Angeles Building Code seismic provisions. 
2. Meet or exceed the requirements specified for Basic Safety Objective using 
ground motions and procedures established by the Department based on ASCE 41. 
106 
 
3. Other methods approved by the Department, deemed to be equivalent to the 
approaches in 1. and 2.  
VI. REQUIRED INFORMATION ON PLANS 
General.  For existing and new construction, the plans and specifications shall be of 
sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the proposed work and to show 
in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Ordinance and the Los Angeles 
Building Code. 
Engineers or architects statement.  The responsible engineer or architect shall 
provide the following statements on the approved plans:  
1.  I am responsible for designing this buildings seismic strengthening in 
compliance with the minimum regulations of the mandatory non-ductile concrete 
retrofit Ordinance (Ordinance No. ________) using the design criteria of (75% of ASCE 7, 
ASCE 41).  
   and when applicable: 
2.   The Registered Deputy Inspector, required as a condition of the use of 
structural design stresses requiring continuous inspection, will be responsible to me as 
required by Section 1704 of the Los Angeles Building Code. 
3. Structural Observation will be performed in accordance with current Los 
Angeles Building Code. 
VII. FINANCING AND INCENTIVES 
Financing program. (?) 
Green incentives. (?)  
Non-conformance incentives. (?)  
Parking reduction incentives. (?)  
 
 
 
107 
 
 
Appendix C 
 
Summary of Back To Business Program 
The adoption and establish of a program will require several steps by the City of 
Los Angeles: 
1. Customize the program based on a template of an example program used 
by the City of Glendale.  Customizations will include adjusting the program 
description to match the requirements of the City of Los Angeles, a review 
and customization of the individual building application information, the 
building owners application and the requirements for certification of the 
designated inspectors. 
2. By Administrative Action, the Superintendent of Buildings should add the B2B 
Program to the Department of Building and Safety procedures and assign a 
staff manager to oversee the program during initial building registrations, 
during annual program renewals and during the post-earthquake scenarios. 
3. Establish all procedures for the review and approval of applications, for 
emergency contacts and for processing of annual reviews.  Each building 
application should include the following information:  
a. Assignment of a specific pretrained & prequalified designated Inspector 
(a B2B Inspector), and back-ups for each building that will be pre-
certified by Building and Safety to inspect the building in the event of a 
declared Emergency and act as liaison with the Building and Safety 
staff regarding inspection review and posting 
b. Emergency contact information for both the building owner and the 
designated inspectors 
c. Building Information:  address, photos, description, floor plans, entrance 
locations, building uses, estimated building valuation, life safety systems, 
fire detection & suppression systems, potential falling hazards, 
hazardous materials 
d. Emergency Response information: emergency trigger information, 
access procedures, Inventory of available documents and equipment 
for the inspectors use 
e. Emergency Inspection Procedures:  
i. Inspection guidelines (ATC-20)  
ii. Detailed instructions (where to look for damage, how to look, 
what to look for, etc.),  
iii. Procedures following aftershocks 
f. Precertification of building 
g. Emergency B2B Inspector Authorization 
h. Annual Program Renewal information  
108 
 
4. Assign designated and dedicated Building and Safety Staff to respond 
automatically within 24 hours of the event or if requested earlier by the 
Buildings B2B Inspector for all buildings enrolled in the program.  The 
responding Building and Safety Staff will review the recommended posting 
and issue the official posting placard on the building.  
5. Provide authority to the responding Building and Safety Staff to provide a 
Permit for Construction while on site based on the recommendations of the 
B2B Inspector. 
6. Publicize and advertise the establishment of the Program to the public and 
promote through various business and community organizations. 
7. Assign staff to maintain and administer the program including review of all 
submitted BORP Building Applications, review of all Annual Renewal 
certificates, and coordination of the communications between the B2B  
Inspectors and Building and Safety during those weeks after a damaging 
earthquake.   
 
Long Term Goal:  Improve the Citys resilience by decreasing downtime with the 
improvement of the Citys official response to a damaging earthquake by expanding 
the capacity of the Department of Building & Safety inspections through the 
establishment of a Building Occupancy Resumption Program.  
1. Benefits to Building Owners: 
a. Insures occupants safety reoccupying building 
b. Results in faster response for inspections 
c. Reduces chance of an overly conservative posting 
d. Will increase owners control of buildings re-occupancy 
e. Reduces chances of tenant displacement 
f. Reduces business interruption risks and costs  
g. Inspires Owner, Tenant & Employee confidence 
2. Benefits to the City of Los Angeles: 
a. Insures Citizens safety 
b. Keeps major Clients happy 
c. Reduces the number of buildings that City is responsible for inspecting 
d. Reduces business interruption costs for building Owners and therefore 
maintains strong tax base for City 
e. May result in proactive seismic retrofitting before the earthquake  
f. Increases Citys resilience & should reduce overall community recovery 
time 
g. Increases citizens confidence in City government 
 
  
109 
 
Appendix D 
USRC Dimensions and Definitions 
Safety, Repair Cost, and Functional Recovery  
The performance of a building cannot be determined with certainty, even for a given level of earthquake 
shaking, and will also vary across possible earthquakes of different distances and strengths. The ratings below, 
when used for earthquake performance, correspond to the average performance given a single earthquake with 
ground shaking corresponding to that required for the design of a new building. 
SAFETY  
The SAFETY rating dimension reflects the expected state of the building in terms of exiting the building, injury and 
loss of life. A SAFETY rating in this context is an indicator of the risk of overall casualties, which includes both 
injuries of various types and seriousness and loss of life.    
  
Safety Rating 
 Exit paths preserved and injuries unlikely 
  Performance will likely result in conditions that do not cause injuries or blockage of exit paths.  
 Major injuries unlikely 
Performance will likely result in conditions that limit the extent and severity of injuries. 
 Loss of life unlikely 
 Performance will likely result in conditions that will not cause loss of life.  
 Loss of life possible in isolated locations 
 Performance will likely result in conditions at some locations within or adjacent to the building leading to 
major injuries and/or loss of life. 
 Loss of life probable throughout the building 
 Performance will likely result in widespread conditions known to be associated with major injuries and loss 
of life.  
NE Not Evaluated 
This dimension has not been evaluated . 
  
110 
 
REPAIR COST 
The REPAIR COST rating dimension reflects an estimate of the cost to repair the building such that it can 
continue to be used as it was at the time the rating is issued. Repair cost is defined as a percentage of the 
buildings overall replacement value, a common insurance concept measuring how much it would cost to 
construct a new building approximately the same as the one prior to the event. Repair cost includes the cost of 
damage to all of the structural, architectural and mechanical and electrical components of a building but does 
not include the cost of damage to the contents. Contents values may vary depending on occupancy at the time 
of the event. However content damage can be estimated once the contents are defined and this can be 
reported separately. Repair cost is determined without consideration of overall market conditions in effect 
following the event, such as post-event increases in local construction costs, and does not include such factors as 
business interruption associated with loss of use or occupancy restrictions, design fees, permit fees, historic 
preservation or mandatory upgrades triggered by building code regulations. 
  
Repair Cost Rating 
 Within typical operating budget 
 Performance will likely result in Repair Cost less than 5% of building replacement value. 
  
 Within the typical insurance deductible 
Performance will likely result  Repair Cost less than 10% of building replacement value. 
 Within industry scenario expected (SEL) loss 
 Performance will likely result  Repair Cost less than 20% of building replacement value. 
  
 Repairable damage 
 Performance will likely result  Repair Cost less than 50% of building replacement value. 
  
 Substantial Damage 
 Performance will likely result  Repair Cost greater than 50% of building replacement value. 
  
NE Not Evaluated 
This dimension has not been evaluated. 
111 
 
  
FUNCTIONAL RECOVERY 
The FUNCTIONAL RECOVERY dimension is an estimate of the time until a property owner or tenant is able to 
enter and use the building for its basic intended functions, assuming that external infrastructure (e.g., utilities, 
transportation) is available to permit access and provide basic services to the building. Back-up utility systems 
may be necessary to achieve four and five star performance goals if external utilities are not functional. A 
FUNCTIONAL RECOVERY rating represents a minimum timeframe to effect repairs and to remove major safety 
hazards and obstacles to occupancy and use. This rating does not address several other factors that can delay 
the time to regain function such as damage or post-event conditions associated with building contents or the 
condition of adjacent buildings. 
  
Functional Recovery  Rating 
 Within days. 
 Performance will likely result  in Functional recovery within hours to days. 
 Within weeks 
Performance will likely result  in Functional recovery that is delayed a week or more. 
 Within months 
 Performance will likely result in Functional recovery that is delayed for at least one month. 
 More than 6 months. 
 Performance will likely result in Functional recovery that is delayed for at least six months. 
 More than one year 
 Performance will likely result  in Functional recovery that is delayed for least one year or more.  
NE Not Evaluated 
This dimension has not been evaluated. 
 The complexity and amount of time needed to restore a building to usable condition can increase quickly in 
relation to the degree of damage. Delays in design, financing, and construction may include time until arrival of 
special-order equipment or materials, increased prices and a lack of local design professionals or contractors 
available for hire in a community where many buildings have been damaged, and longer than usual permitting 
and inspection wait times. These factors can be estimated and reported separately, but the actual total time 
impact of these factors is highly uncertain and may even be different depending on who owns the building. 
 
112 
 
 Appendix E 
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING 
FOR THE CITY OF LOS ANGELES 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RESILIENCE PARTNERSHIP 
 
 This MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING is made and entered into by and 
among the City of Los Angeles (City), through the Los Angeles Mayors Office of 
Homeland Security and Public Safety, and the participating partners executing this 
agreement (the Carriers).  This MOU memorializes the voluntary participation of the 
Carriers in partnership with the City to protect and restore telecommunications 
coverage for City residents and businesses in the event of a large scale emergency, 
including natural disasters, acts of terrorism, and other man-made disasters. 
 
I.  PURPOSE 
 
The City mitigates, plans, prepares for, responds to, and aids in recovery from 
the effects of emergencies that threaten lives, property, and the environment.  As the 
Citys residents and businesses become more reliant upon wireless communications 
and remote access to information, the City recognizes the critical role that Carriers 
will play in ensuring continuity of coverage in the event of a natural or man-made 
disaster that impacts public and private communications infrastructure.  It is 
anticipated that in a large scale earthquake, for example, between 100,000 and 
200,000 addresses will lose phone and internet service. 
 
The City and the Carriers intend to cooperate to carry out their respective 
responsibilities and plan and support joint initiatives with respect to disaster mitigation, 
preparedness, response, and recovery operations.  The City and Carriers recognize 
that sharing certain information concerning emergency conditions, emergency 
response plans, and critical infrastructure impacts may maximize and expedite one 
anothers restoration opportunities.   
 
113 
 
This MOU sets forth the terms by which the City and the Carriers will provide 
information, resources, services, personnel, as available, in order to strengthen the 
capacity to protect and expeditiously restore telecommunications coverage for City 
residents and businesses.  Under this MOU, the City and the Carriers intend to 
develop specific action plans addressing particular aspects of emergency response 
operations. 
 
II. RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
A. The City will, as resources and information are available, and as is 
appropriate, undertake the following responsibilities: 
 
1. The City shall coordinate with the Carriers for assistance during 
emergencies and disasters.  Additionally, the City shall aid the Carriers 
in their efforts to retain telecommunication coverage in the City after a 
large emergency or disaster.    
 
2. The City will provide notification of emergency conditions that may 
affect the Carriers interests, enabling Carriers to better monitor disaster 
events.  This will include naming a designee for the Carriers 
representatives during disasters. 
 
3. As deemed appropriate and reasonable, the City may facilitate access 
to critical infrastructure sites to enable Carriers to restore 
telecommunication coverage after a large emergency or disaster.  This 
may include the assistance of law enforcement escorts, prioritization of 
road clearance and debris removal, and assistance providing 
temporary access to otherwise restricted locations. 
 
4. The City, through its Emergency Management Department (EMD), will 
make training and exercises available on a regular basis to the 
Carriers representatives to increase situational awareness during 
emergencies and disasters. 
 
5. The City will share reports, policies, guidance manuals, brochures, 
videos, lessons learned, best practices and training resources as 
permitted. 
114 
 
 
6. The City will provide emergency operations center access for pre-
designated representatives of the Carriers during emergencies.  The 
City reserves the right to limit access to emergency operations centers 
based upon safety or security needs. 
 
B. The Carriers will, as resources and information are available, and as is 
appropriate, undertake the following responsibilities:  
 
1. The Carriers shall provide (or coordinate with EMD to develop) its 
communication strategy (with contractors, repair workers, vendors, etc.) 
to provide effective response and recovery in the event of an 
emergency.   
 
2. Inventory 
 
a. Carriers shall develop and maintain a detailed inventory of 
equipment and resources which are required in the event of an 
emergency.  City and Carriers will collaborate to ensure sufficient 
resources are available, as well as develop effective means of 
preventing theft or vandalism of critical assets. 
b. Carriers shall provide an updated inventory to the City annually.   
 
3. Carriers shall identify critical facilities and vulnerabilities at each of their 
proprietary sites.  Carriers shall identify areas recognized as single 
points of failure likely to require equipment immediately.  Carriers shall 
provide a list or classification of proprietary sites (cell and switch sites) 
to the City in the order of importance and size to assist coordination 
with the City in the event of an emergency.  
 
4. The Carriers shall appoint an individual with the authority to make 
critical decisions about the company after an Emergency Declaration.  
Said designee shall be the main point of contact to assist the City in its 
recovery efforts to restore telecommunication coverage to the City. 
 
5. The Carriers shall provide the City with company emergency plans that 
are triggered by an Emergency Declaration and shall include the 
115 
 
following: 
 
a. Protocol for initiation/activation of emergency plans. 
b. Staffing of personnel with roles before, during, and after an 
emergency. 
c. Repair strategy for continuity of services, equipment distribution, 
projected timelines for repair. 
d. Backup power and fuel utilization plans. 
e. Timelines for reconstruction, repair, and recovery based upon 
projected earthquake or other disaster impacts. 
 
6. In the event of an emergency, Carriers will cooperate to temporarily 
share networks amongst one another, to the extent technologically 
feasible, such that customers voice and data traffic may be securely 
carried on whatever network is compatible and more functional in their 
area, regardless of customers particular networks or service 
agreements, and without incurring additional costs. 
 
7. In the event of an emergency, Carriers will open Wifi networks, to the 
extent technologically feasible, for the purpose of providing temporary 
connections to the internet for secure public and private access to 
data and voice-over-Wi-Fi traffic.  
 
III. PROTECTION OF CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY INFORMATION 
 
A. The Carriers may share information, both in writing and orally, essential to 
effect emergency response consistent with applicable laws and the need 
to protective sensitive proprietary information.  This information shall be 
designated as Confidential and shall be protected by the City to the 
extent allowed by law and pursuant to the terms of a nondisclosure 
agreement, to be executed at a later date. 
 
B. In no event shall the City disclose or require a Carrier to disclose 
information designated by a Carrier as Confidential without its prior written 
consent. 
 
C. Confidential Information shared by Carriers, including emergency inventory, 
plans, and critical infrastructure data shall be securely stored in the Citys 
116 
 
Public Critical Infrastructure Management System (PCIIMS).  Access to such 
Confidential Information will be restricted to specified law enforcement 
personnel. 
 
IV. TERM 
 
This MOU shall remain in effect until such time as a party terminates their 
participation by providing notice, in writing, to the other parties of their intent 
to terminate. 
 
V. POINTS OF CONTACT 
 
The City and the Carriers will designate key people within their respective 
organizations to implement the MOU.  The points of contacts will direct and 
coordinate partnership activities to ensure that mutual benefits and interests 
are served.  The respective offices responsible for spearheading 
implementation are: 
 
A. Los Angeles Mayors Office 
 
Eileen Decker 
Deputy Mayor, Homeland Security & Public Safety 
Office of Mayor Eric Garcetti 
200 N. Spring Street, Room 303 
Los Angeles, California 90012 
(213) 978-0687 
eileen.decker@lacity.org 
 
117 
 
B. Emergency Management Department 
 
C. Sprint Corporation 
 
D. Verizon Communications 
 
E. T-Mobile US, Inc. 
 
F. AT&T, Inc. 
 
G. Time Warner Cable 
 
VI. LIABILITY 
 
A. Nothing in this MOU shall be construed as encroaching upon the sovereign 
rights, privileges, and immunities of any of the parties hereto in the conduct 
of inherently Municipal, State or Federal government operations.  Further, 
nothing in this MOU is intended to conflict with current law, regulation, or 
the policies and directives of any of the parties.  If any terms and 
conditions of this MOU are inconsistent with such authorities, the 
inconsistent term shall be deemed invalid, and the remaining terms and 
conditions of this MOU shall remain in full force and effect. 
 
B. Each party will be responsible for its own actions in providing services 
under this MOU and shall not be liable for any civil liability that may arise 
from the furnishing of the services by any other party to this MOU.  
Participation in this MOU shall not impose any liability for claims upon any 
party to which it would not otherwise be subject under applicable law. 
 
C. By entering into this MOU, the parties do not intend to create any 
obligations express or implied other than those set out herein.  Further, this 
MOU shall not create any rights in any party other than the signatories to 
this MOU.  
 
VII. OTHER PROVISIONS 
118 
 
 
A. This MOU creates neither a partnership nor a joint venture, and no party 
has the authority to bind another.  This MOU is not intended to be 
enforceable in any court of law or dispute resolution forum. 
 
B. The parties may use or display each others name, emblem, or trademarks 
only in the case of particular projects and only with the prior written 
consent of the other party. 
 
C. Any services, equipment or personnel provided to or by the City to 
accomplish the goals anticipated under this MOU are done so without 
expectation of reimbursement or the payment of fees related to the 
provision of such services, equipment or personnel. 
 
D. Nothing herein is intended to create any rights or benefits, substantive or 
procedural, enforceable at law or in equity, against the City of Los 
Angeles, its agencies, departments, entities, officers, employees, or any 
other person. 
 
E. This MOU imposes no financial obligation on the signatories.  In the event 
that the City and any party wish to enter into a financial arrangement, 
said parties shall execute an agreement/contract stipulating the terms of 
said financial arrangement. 
 
 
[THIS SECTION IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK] 
 
 
  
119 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, each of the Participants have caused this MOU to be 
executed by their duly authorized representatives. 
 
For: [Company Name] For: THE CITY OF LOS ANGELES    
ERIC GARCETTI, Mayor 
    By: ____________________________ By   
  
 Eric Garcetti, Mayor 
    Name/Title: _____________________ 
Date: __________________________  Homeland Security and 
  Public Safety, Mayors Office 
 Date   
    [SEAL]  
For: [Company Name] For: [Company Name] 
    By: ____________________________     By: ____________________________ 
    
    Name/Title: _____________________     Name/Title: _____________________ 
Date: __________________________ Date: __________________________ 
  
  
    [SEAL]      
 
 
[SEAL] 
120 
 
For: [Company Name] For: [Company Name] 
    By: ____________________________     By: ____________________________ 
    
    Name/Title: _____________________     Name/Title: _____________________ 
Date: __________________________ Date: __________________________ 
  
  
    [SEAL]      
 
 
[SEAL] 
 
 
 
 
  
121 
 
 
Appendix F 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Building on work of the Structural Engineers Association of Northern California that 
began in 2006, and the recommendations of a joint FEMA/Applied Technology 
Council Stakeholder's workshop held in March, 2011, Eric Von Berg, a Past President 
of the California Mortgage Bankers Association, proposed the formation of a non-
profit organization to be the implementation organization for a rating system that 
would express the earthquake performance of buildings. Soon after, the US 
Resiliency Council (USRC) was launched as a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization, with the 
mission of becoming the administrative vehicle for implementing a building 
performance rating system. 
 
The USRC will play a similar role as the USGBC has played in sustainable design. It 
will promote and implement a building rating system, and educate the public about 
hazards associated with buildings. Beginning with seismic hazard, the USER's vision is 
to become a nationally respected organization that considers a broad range of 
natural and man-made risks. The USRC does not develop the technical evaluation 
methodologies, but will implement the best systems developed by engineering and 
technical experts nationwide.  
 
The USRC will credential engineers and other professionals who wish to rate 
buildings for their clients, and review rating evaluations for conformance to the 
technical methodologies. In this way, the ratings systems and procedures developed 
122 
 
by the USRC will provide a level of technical credibility that can be relied upon by 
users. The USRC will also bring into leadership and advisory positions, stakeholder 
groups concerned about the safety and performance of buildings, ensuring that the 
implementation of the USRC rating systems are both fair and useful. 
 
In Sept, 2013 the Founders began the process of raising initial start-up funding to 
enable the launch of the organization. By October, 2014 in excess of $500,000 has 
been committed over two years by Founding Members that include engineering 
companies, professional organizations, industry partners and individuals. In June, 2014 
the first meeting of the Founding Members was held to develop the organizational 
structure and operational procedures of the USRC, with a goal to publicly launch the 
organization in early 2015.  
 
 
 
 
123 
 
