
 
Introduction 
1. Introduction 
1.1. Overview 
All communities face hazard events. Across the nation, communities experience disruptions from 
weather, infrastructure failures, cyber-attacks, technological accidents, environmental changes, and other 
hazards. Hazard events become actual disasters when communities experience extensive disruption in 
basic functions, when lives and livelihoods are in jeopardy, and when recovery requires a long period of 
time. 
Depending on the magnitude and duration of the recovery, communities may face consequences ranging 
from temporary interruptions in services to loss of jobs, and businesses. Residents may need to relocate, 
and precious assets can be lost. That is why strengthening community resilience is so important.  
Community resilience is the ability to prepare for anticipated hazards, adapt to changing conditions, and 
withstand and recover rapidly from disruptions. Activities, such as disaster preparedness  which includes 
prevention, protection, mitigation, response, and recovery  are key steps to resilience. But many 
communities can do more, especially by focusing on the ingredients necessary for recovery.  
The National Preparedness Goal [FEMA 2015a] developed by Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA) envisions a secure and resilient nation with the capabilities required across the whole 
community to prevent, protect against, mitigate, respond to, and recover from the threats and hazards that 
pose the greatest risk. This Guide supports that goal by addressing the role buildings and infrastructure 
systems play in assuring the health and vitality of the social and economic fabric of the community. It 
offers a six-step planning process for local governments, who are the logical conveners, to bring 
stakeholders together and incorporate resilience into their short- and long-term planning. This will enable 
communities to improve their resilience over time in a way that is cost effective and consistent with their 
development goals.  
Having a plan in place before a potential disaster strikes increases the ability of communities to move 
quickly in a way that better prepares them for future events. Even if an extreme event occurs, a resilient 
community likely will experience reduced disruption and recovery time. There are other benefits of 
resilience planning: communities with well-developed resilience plans are more likely to be more 
attractive to employers and residents alike. These communities can increase their ability to achieve 
broader goals of economic development and social advancement that improve the quality of life. And, 
they are more likely to use hazard events as an opportunity to build back better. 
Resilient communities demonstrate common characteristics: community leaders commitment to 
resilience, continual improvements in preparedness and response to threats and disruptions, a 
collaborative approach, and appreciation of internal and external dependencies. Many of these 
communities employ risk management, business continuity methods, and other management practices that 
enable them to be adaptable and flexible when confronting changing conditions.  
This  (Guide) helps 
communities determine customized resilience goals based on the long-term community goals and the 
corresponding performance goals for buildings and infrastructure systems. Resilience plans that follow 
this Guide are based on a community-level assessment of social needs and functions supported by the 
built environment. These social functions are fundamental. They include government, economics, health, 
education, community services, religion, culture, and media. The built environment includes buildings 
and infrastructure systems, such as energy, communication, water and wastewater, and transportation 
systems. Buildings and infrastructure systems are vital to social functions and to a communitys overall 
prosperity and health. If these systems fail or are damaged, essential services can be interrupted over a 
9 
 
Introduction 
wide geographic area. This Guide helps 
communities plan how to rapidly, prioritize and 
restore civil and social functions.  
While all disaster preparedness steps (prevention, 
protection, mitigation, response, and recovery) 
must be addressed to achieve community 
resilience, this Guide primarily focuses on 
planning for recovery of community functions, 
for which there is less published guidance. The 
Guide does not repeat the guidance already 
available on prevention, protection, mitigation, 
and response activities, all of which are part of 
resilience planning and activities. Instead, the 
Guide provides a step-by-step planning process 
that helps communities understand issues relating 
to community-level damage and, especially, to 
prioritize recovery planning. In essence, the 
recovery process completes resilience planning, 
and informs other preparedness steps. For 
instance, when comparing alternative mitigation 
strategies, evaluating recovery plans associated 
with each mitigation strategy provides a more 
informed basis for selecting an approach. 
Communities can and should integrate resilience 
into their long-term community planning process. 
A resilient community can also offer day-to-day 
community benefits by reducing daily disruptions 
through improved planning, design, and 
construction practices. Even if it is many years 
before a hazard event occurs, implementing the 
communitys resilience plan can continue to 
improve the performance of its buildings and 
infrastructure systems and improve its 
attractiveness as a place to work and live. 
The Guide helps communities prioritize 
improvements to buildings and infrastructure 
systems based on the role of these structures in 
supporting social institutions functions during 
recovery. The Guide addresses infrastructure 
dependencies and the cascading effects of system 
failures. It is organized around six planning steps 
(Figure 1-1) outlined in the Comprehensive 
Preparedness Guide [FEMA 2010] and associated 
key activities:  
1. Form a collaborative planning team  
2. Understand the situation Figure 1-1: Six-step planning process for 
3. Determine goals and objectives community resilience 
10 
 
Introduction 
4. Plan development  
5. Plan preparation, review, and approval 
6. Plan implementation and maintenance 
Community planning for resilience of the built environment needs input from all stakeholders, including 
local government offices for community development, emergency response, social services, public works, 
and buildings. Other government agencies with facilities or infrastructure, as well as public and private 
developers, owners and operators of buildings and infrastructure systems, should be involved, as should 
representatives of local business and industry along with social organizations. Where communities are 
already working on aspects of planning to achieve resilience (e.g., land use planning, long-term economic 
development, mitigation, building inspections, or emergency management), these efforts should be 
understood and coordinated with the overall planning effort. 
When all interests and needs are addressed in a comprehensive plan at the community level, a transparent, 
supportable path forward can emerge with consensus support. Resources can then be allocated based on 
community-wide goals and priorities.  
1.2. Defining Communities 
The National Preparedness Goal asserts that Individual and community preparedness is fundamental to 
our success. There are varying definitions of community. In this Guide, community refers to a place 
designated by geographical boundaries that functions under the jurisdiction of a governance structure, 
such as a town, city, or county. It is within these places that most people live, work, play, and build their 
futures. Each community has its own identity based on location, history, leadership, population, and 
available resources. Successful communities provide its members with the means to meet essential needs 
and to pursue their interests and aspirations.  
Communities are highly diverse in terms of geography and populations. They range from small, rural 
communities to large, dense, urban communities. Communities have different histories, cultures, social 
make-up, businesses, and access to and availability of resources. They also are subject to varying hazards, 
and have different degrees of risk tolerance. An effective community resilience plan will be customized 
and take into account each of these factors. 
Communities can identify and describe their resources and assets as capital. This approach is based on 
The Community Capitals Framework (Figure 1-2): financial (economic), built (physical), political, social, 
human, cultural, and natural. These forms of capital are interrelated and give each community its unique 
character.  
 
Figure 1-2: The Community Capitals Framework [adapted and redrawn, Flora et al, 2008] 
11 
 
Introduction 
Community capitals can be classified into the following categories [Ritchie and Gill 2011]:  
x Financial. Financial savings, income, investments, and available credit at the community-level 
x Built. Buildings and infrastructure systems within a community 
x Political. Access to resources and the ability/power to influence their distribution; also, the ability 
to engage external entities in efforts to achieve goals 
x Social. Social networks, associations, and the trust they generate among groups and individuals 
within the community 
x Human. Knowledge, skills, health, and physical ability of community members  
x Cultural. Language, symbols, mannerisms, attitudes, competencies, and orientations of local 
community members/groups 
x Natural. Resources, such as air, land, water, minerals, oil, and the overall stability of ecosystems 
Knowledge about each type of capital contributes to understanding the communitys capacity for 
resilience planning and investments. All capacities can provide important inputs and resources from 
which to draw.  
While all types of capital are important to each community, this Guide focuses primarily on built capital 
(i.e., buildings and infrastructure systems), with a strong emphasis on how built capital supports other 
capitals within a community, especially social capital. Social capital has the potential to contribute to 
resilience by enhancing sense of belonging and strengthening bonds between individuals and groups 
within communities. The needs of community members and social institutions  including government, 
industry, business, education, and health  help define functional requirements for a communitys 
buildings and infrastructure systems (Figure 1-3). For instance, after a significant event, can residents 
remain in their homes? Can governments communicate with residents to inform them and support 
recovery efforts? Can businesses and factories resume operations within a reasonable period? These types 
of social needs determine the performance expected from a communitys buildings and infrastructure 
systems.  
 
Figure 1-3: The social functions of a community define the functional requirements of a communitys 
buildings and infrastructure systems. 
For communities to function and prosper, they need buildings and infrastructure systems that are 
operational. When buildings and infrastructure systems are damaged, social services frequently are 
interrupted, economic losses soar, and resources must be re-allocated to repair and rebuild. When damage 
12 
 
Introduction 
is extensive, the recovery process can be a significant drain on local residents and their resources, and 
may be drawn out over years. Sometimes, full recovery is not possible. 
1.3. Community Resilience 
The term resilience is used in many ways by community stakeholders. Presidential Policy Directive 
(PPD)-8 [2011] defines resilience as the ability to adapt to changing conditions and withstand and 
rapidly recover from disruption due to emergencies. PPD-21 [2013] expanded the definition to the 
ability to prepare for and adapt to changing conditions and to withstand and recover rapidly from 
disruptions. Resilience includes the ability to withstand and recover from deliberate attacks, accidents, or 
naturally occurring threats or incidents. Disaster refers to a serious disruption of the functioning of a 
community or a society causing widespread human, material, economic or environmental losses which 
exceed the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources [National 
Science and Technology Council 2005]. Under these definitions, resilience includes activities already 
conducted by some communities as a part of disaster preparedness.  
In the context of this Guide, the phrase prepare for and adapt to changing conditions refers to preparing 
for conditions that may occur within the lifetime of a facility or infrastructure system. That could be a 
hazard event or physical conditions that change over time. Depending on location, preparation may 
include planning for sea level rise in coastal areas or for the effects of drought, or include improving 
design and performance requirements for a hazard event, such as a hurricane or earthquake. Changing 
conditions also may include alterations in the use of infrastructure systems. For example, increased use of 
communication  devices  like wireless systems that need an array of cell towers  may lead to new 
dependencies between infrastructure systems. Aging also affects infrastructure. If buildings and 
infrastructure systems are designed, maintained and operated properly, the likelihood of disruption to 
community functions from deterioration will be reduced. 
The second part of the definition of resilience, withstand and recover quickly from disruptions, requires 
that a range of possible hazard events be considered. In a more resilient community, a hazard event that 
occurs at the intensity that the affected structures were designed to meet under relevant codes and 
standards may cause local disruptions tolerated by the community without long-term detrimental effects 
(e.g., permanent relocation of residents or business). If an unanticipated or extreme event occurs, planning 
and preparation for planned events likely will reduce the extent of disruption and time for recovery. 
Moreover, communities that have a well-developed resilience plan in place are better prepared for the 
recovery process. 
1.4. Community Resilience and the Built Environment 
Resilience and functionality. Figure 1-4 depicts the concept of resilience for a building or infrastructure 
system, collectively referred to as the built environment in terms of functionality versus the performance 
goal of time to recovery of function. Functionality is a measure of how well a building or infrastructure 
system operates and delivers its service or meets its intended purpose. Time to recovery of function is a 
measure of how long it takes before a building or infrastructure system is functioning. Recovery time can 
also indirectly measure the pre-event condition of the system, because longer recovery times indicate a 
less resilient system. To more thoroughly characterize the Guide uses the recovery phases defined by the 
FEMA National Disaster Recovery Framework [FEMA 2011b]: short-term, intermediate, and long-term.  
13 
 
Introduction 
 
Figure 1-4: Resilience can be expressed simply, in terms of system functionality and the time to recover 
functionality following a disruptive hazard event [McAllister 2013]. 
Two contrasting building conditions are considered, as described in Table 1-1. Figure 1-4 illustrates how 
each of these conditions can impact the performance of a building, and recovery of its functionality. At 
the time of the hazard event, the system condition affects the degree of damage and lost functionality. 
Recovery of function can be highly variable, as it depends on the damage incurred, dependencies on other 
systems, availability of resources, and the owners ability to rapidly execute recovery plans that are ready 
to go. 
Table 1-1: System condition at the time of the hazard event affects the degree of damage and lost 
functionality. 
Condition A  Condition B  
Experiences modest loss of  Increased vulnerability to the hazard  
functionality after the event relative to Condition A 
x Well maintained x Degradation of functionality  
x Benefitted from good design and mitigation projects x Deterioration in the physical system  
x Improved level of functionality before hazard event x Lack of adequate maintenance 
x Modest loss of functionality after event 
Planning for resilience and putting those plans into action can minimize or even eliminate loss of 
functionality, depending on the degree of damage, available solutions, resources, and priorities. When 
hazard events occur, loss of functionality can occur suddenly  in minutes or over days  due to physical 
damage to one or more systems. Recovering functionality may take anywhere from a few hours to years. 
In most instances, systems that experience less loss of functionality after a hazard event recover more 
rapidly.  
14 
 
Introduction 
Why is community resilience and planning important? Hazard events can disrupt community functions 
so extensively that they become disasters and result in permanent changes. Hurricane Katrina (2005) and 
Hurricane Sandy (2012) are recent examples of hazard events that were followed by economic decline in 
localities that experienced significant damage and slow rates of recovery. The slow recovery in some 
areas affected by Hurricane Katrina also led to population relocation between communities. Even lesser 
events inflict significant damage on communities across our country each year. Between 2000 and 2014, 
there were between 84 and 242 Presidential disaster declarations each year from the combined effects of 
floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, fires, and other events. Severe storms accounted for the 
majority of those declarations [FEMA 2011a].  
Communities reduce vulnerabilities by adopting and enforcing appropriate codes, standards, and 
regulations; by good land use planning; and by disaster preparedness activities. These activities are 
necessary and prudent, but are not enough, by themselves, to make a community resilient. Across the 
nation, communities continue to experience significant damage and losses, despite robust adoption and 
enforcement of best practices, regulations, and codes and standards. There are a number of reasons for 
this apparent contradiction.  
Many existing buildings and infrastructure systems were built before the modern standards, codes, and 
practices that are now in place existed. Adoption of modern standards and codes is a necessary but 
insufficient step, especially because the positive effects can be slow to accumulate. Buildings and 
infrastructure systems are replaced over decades. Also, standards and codes for buildings and each 
infrastructure system frequently are developed independently and do not address dependencies between 
systems or community-level performance goals, including recovery of function. Some states have codes 
that preclude modifications by local jurisdictions. Communities may need to coordinate with state 
officials to facilitate local adoption of code criteria that are more stringent than those of the statewide 
code. 
Community resilience requires that the built environment maintain acceptable levels of functionality 
during and after events. Communities need to ensure their built environment operates within a specified 
time period to support recovery of functions. Recovery times should be based on the role and importance 
of each facility or infrastructure system within the community, and the extent of disruption that can be 
tolerated. Not all facilities need to be restored within the same timeframe. 
This Guide recognizes that buildings and infrastructure systems are built to different codes with varying 
degrees of enforcement over time, and that this mixture of construction will remain in place in most 
communities for a long time. Nevertheless, those structures eventually will degrade and deficiencies will 
become apparent, including after a hazard strikes. That process provides an opportunity to develop and 
implement a new paradigm  community resilience  when planning for and envisioning the future of 
each community. 
Developing a resilience plan offers communities a rational basis for considering alternative measures to 
meet community goals through improvements in the performance of the built environment. Not every 
aspect of resilience planning needs to happen at once. Multiple solutions or stages may be proposed, 
including temporary solutions to meet immediate needs, as well as long-term steps to upgrade or replace 
buildings or infrastructure systems. 
1.5. Developing a Plan for Community Resilience  
Disruptive events are best addressed by a community resilience plan that includes performance goals for 
the built environment based on the social functions of the community, and preparedness strategies that 
incorporate activities related to prevention, protection, mitigation, response, and recovery. Plans to 
improve community resilience through the built environment may include land use policy, temporary 
measures (e.g., interim requirements for repair or retrofit), and other structural and non-structural 
15 
 
Introduction 
approaches. Other aspects of a resilient community, such as business continuity and issues related to 
human health, safety, and general welfare, also may inform performance goals for the built environment.  
To ensure understanding and support by the community and all stakeholders, an active community 
engagement process needs to be developed and continuously implemented throughout the planning 
process.  
Planning steps and key activities for community resilience. Figure 1-1 (page 10) and Table 1-2 
summarize this Guides six planning steps and associated key activities for achieving community 
resilience.  
1. Form a collaborative planning team. Strong but inclusive leadership is needed to promote and 
coordinate resilience. Management commitment and clear designation of roles, responsibilities 
and authorities are essential. The planning team likely will include representatives from local 
government (e.g., community development, emergency management, public works, and building 
departments) and county, state, or federal government agencies responsible for facilities or 
infrastructure systems in the region. Other entities to be included are public and private owners 
and operators of buildings and infrastructure systems, as well as local businesses and industry.  
Organizations representing significant community groups and populations, including those that 
are especially vulnerable, are also important participants. Some of these stakeholders will already 
be working on aspects of planning for resilience, such as land use planning, long-term economic 
development, business continuity, hazard mitigation, building inspections, or emergency 
management.  
2. Understand the situation. Understanding the situation involves characterizing both the social 
dimensions and built environment of a community.  
Social dimensions. Identifying important social functions and services, as well as key contacts or 
representatives who can provide information about systems and decision making, is essential. 
Social dimensions encompass the needs of individuals and social institutions, including those 
representing government, business and industry, finance, health, education, community service, 
and those representing particular religious and cultural beliefs, and the media. Shelter, food, and 
water during and after a hazard event are examples of the most fundamental social needs of 
individuals and families.  
Built environment. Identifying buildings and infrastructure systems that support the communitys 
social functions, and identifying key contacts or representatives who can provide information 
about physical systems is also essential. Buildings and infrastructure systems can be grouped into 
clusters that support common functions vital to social systems.  
Link functions. Additionally, the dependencies between social services and the supporting built 
environment are identified. Linking buildings and infrastructure systems to desired social services 
is an important step in a plan to achieve community resilience. 
3. Determine goals and objectives. When planning, leaders should consider the needs of the 
community and stakeholders, and identify risks and opportunities associated with desired 
outcomes, determine how to prevent or reduce undesired effects, and take steps to achieve 
continual improvement. Identifying and agreeing on long-term community goals are essential in  
guiding community resilience plans and carrying out strategies to achieve greater resilience. For 
example, in response to persistent flooding, a community may want to redevelop a floodplain to 
become a community park. At the same time, it should consider the impact of needing to relocate 
residences and businesses. Also, establishing clear community goals is necessary to prioritize 
resilience activities. The communitys goals and objectives set by the team should be measurable, 
take into account any requirements that apply, and be monitored and updated as appropriate. 
16 
 
Introduction 
Table 1-2: Planning steps for community resilience 
Planning Steps Key Activities 
1. Form a x Identify resilience leader for the community  
Collaborative x Identify team members, and their roles and responsibilities  
Planning Team 
(Chapter 2) x Identify key public and private stakeholders for all phases of planning and 
implementation  
2. Understand the x Social Dimensions   
Situation   Identify and characterize functions and dependencies of social institutions, including 
(Chapter 3) business, industry, and financial systems, based on individual/social needs met by 
these institutions and social assets and vulnerabilities 
 Identify how social functions are supported by the built environment 
 Identify key contacts and representatives for evaluation, coordination, and decision 
making activities 
x Built Environment   
 Identify and characterize buildings and infrastructure systems, including condition, 
location, and dependencies between and among systems  
 Identify key contacts/representatives for evaluation, coordination, and decision 
making activities 
 Identify existing plans to be coordinated with the resilience plan 
x Link social functions to the supporting built environment 
x Define building clusters and supporting infrastructure 
3. Determine x Establish long-term community goals  
Goals and x Establish desired recovery performance goals for the built environment at the community 
Objectives  level based on social needs, and dependencies and cascading effects between systems 
(Chapter 4) 
x Define community hazards and levels  
x Determine anticipated performance during and after a hazard event to support social 
functions 
x Summarize the results 
4. Plan x Evaluate gaps between the desired and anticipated performance of the built environment 
Development  to improve community resilience and summarize results  
(Chapter 5) x Identify solutions to address gaps including both administrative and construction options 
x Prioritize solutions and develop an implementation strategy 
5. Plan x Document the community plan and implementation strategy 
Preparation, x Obtain feedback and approval from stakeholders and community  
Review, and 
Approval x Finalize and approve the plan 
(Chapter 6) 
6. Plan x Execute approved administrative and construction solutions  
Implementation x Evaluate and update on a periodic basis  
and 
Maintenance x Modify short or long-term implementation strategy to achieve performance goals as 
(Chapter 7) needed 
17 
 
Introduction 
Performance goals for the built environment are based on the role buildings and infrastructure 
systems play in the community. For a community to be resilient following a disruptive event, 
those structures need to function as required to support community recovery. In this Guide, the 
performance goals for the built environment are expressed in terms of the time needed to recover 
the function and role in the community.  
Two recovery times need to be established for the built environment: the desired long-term 
performance goal and the anticipated performance for existing systems. First, goals for the 
desired performance (recovery of function) should consider the social needs of the community 
and the functions that each group, or cluster, of buildings and infrastructure systems must provide 
to meet those needs. They also should reflect dependencies between and among systems or the 
cascading effects caused by failures. Desired performance goals for resilience are set 
independently of hazards; they are driven by social needs, not by a particular hazard event. Then, 
the anticipated performance of building clusters and infrastructure systems are evaluated for 
specified hazard events to determine the expected time to recover function. Prevailing hazards 
and the effects of changing conditions, such as sea level rise or drought, are used to determine 
anticipated performance. 
This Guide recommends using three hazard levels: routine, design, and extreme. These address a 
range of potential damage and consequences, and are helpful in formulating response and 
recovery scenarios. Routine hazard events can lead to the more frequent, less consequential 
events but they may still be damaging for a community. Where defined by building codes, the 
design hazard event (e.g., earthquake, high winds) is the level used to design structures. Extreme 
events may also be defined in codes for some hazards, such as earthquakes; they are the most 
likely to cause far-reaching damage. Where codes do not define hazard levels, the community 
may establish a hazard level or scenario based on available guidance or the predicted frequency 
of hazards.  
A communitys resilience plan should be anchored around the design event, but a community 
should also evaluate routine and extreme events to ensure that they are planning comprehensively 
for a range of possibilities. This approach helps comunities understand performance, 
consequences, and recovery needs across a range of hazard levels. By understanding how the 
built environment will perform and recover over this range, communities will be better informed 
about priorities and potential implementation strategies.  
4. Develop the Plan. The team should compare the desired and anticipated performance of the built 
environment to identify gaps in performance. Then, it should prioritize gaps in achieving the 
desired performance based on community goals. Next the team would develop possible solutions. 
These should include administrative and construction options to mitigate damage and to improve 
recovery of functions across the community.  
Land use planning is an example of an administrative tool. Options may include either of both of 
the following: (a) implement land use planning and redevelopment strategies before a hazard 
event occurs to reduce potential damage and disruption, and (b) develop plans for alternate land 
use and redevelopment strategies as part of the recovery process. These options often are part of 
community development processes, particularly in seismic and flood-prone hazard areas. 
There may be multiple solutions or phases needed to achieve desired performance, including 
temporary or short-term solutions to meet immediate needs an addition to long-term, permanent 
solutions. These solutions can be prioritized, based on resources necessary to meet the desired 
performance goals established in the previous step.  
18 
 
Introduction 
5. Prepare, Review and Approve the Plan. Once the team develops a resilience plan, it needs to 
document the elements of the process: community goals, desired performance goals for social 
functions and the built environment, prevailing hazards, anticipated performance for the existing 
building clusters and infrastructure systems, prioritized gaps, and short- and long-term 
implementation strategies and solutions. The plan should be broadly disseminated among 
stakeholders and their organizations, as well as with community members. Seeking their review 
and comment is critical to gain support, as is providing feedback to them to maintain their 
support. The review process will differ from community to community. After review, the plan 
should be finalized and adopted by the community.  
6. Implement and Maintain the Plan. The community then executes the administrative and 
construction solutions in the approved plan. It is important that the community evaluate the plan 
periodically, and update or adjust it as needed. Updates may include modifying the goals or short- 
or long-term implementation strategies. This work can be led by the designated lead official or by 
successors charged with implementing and maintaining the plan.  
1.6. Other Federal Guidance Supporting Community Resilience  
The Guide complements other federal guidance that supports resilience ranging from local to national 
levels. Many federal programs and initiatives support resilience, all of which cannot be addressed here. 
Key guidance programs managed by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)  the National 
Preparedness Goal [FEMA 2015a] and the National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP)  are outlined 
briefly to provide the context for the Guide and its role in supporting resilience across the nation. Two 
assessment documents by FEMA that address community assessments are also presented. 
1.6.1. National Preparedness Goal 
The National Preparedness Goal developed by FEMA identifies core capabilities that the whole 
community needs to strengthen to ensure the security and resiliency of the . The whole 
community includes individuals, communities, the private and nonprofit sectors, faith-based 
organizations, and federal, state, and local governments. The Goal stresses the importance of 
preparedness efforts, uses a risk-based approach to preparedness, and integrates the activities across five 
preparedness mission areas through the National Planning Frameworks [FEMA 2015b]: Prevention, 
Protection, Mitigation, Response, and Recovery. The National Preparedness Goal defines success in the 
following way:  
A secure and resilient nation with the capabilities required across the whole community 
to prevent, protect against, mitigate, respond to, and recover from the threats and 
hazards that pose the greatest risk. 
These risks may include a number of hazards: natural hazards, such as hurricanes or floods, disease 
outbreak and other pandemics, technological or accidental hazards, such as a chemical spill or dam 
failure, and terrorist attacks. The National Preparedness Goal identifies core capabilities necessary to 
achieve a secure and resilient nation under each of the five mission areas, as shown in Table 1-3. The top 
row lists the five mission areas. Planning, public information and warning, and operational coordination 
are addressed across all five mission areas. The Guide directly supports many of the core capabilities of 
the Goal. Use of the Guide by local jurisdictions supports all mission areas and indirectly informs a 
variety of core capabilities.  
19 
 
 
 
 cultural 
social 
recovery
 
  
 
Recovery
Economic Health and servicesHousingInfrastructure systemsNatural and resources
     
xxxxx
 
 
 
 
   
 
 ponse/health  
Volume Iply chain 
 
-res
systemssup
 communications 
assessment
  security, protection, 
Response
transportationmanagement services
health, healthcare, and 
care servicessearch and rescue 
management and 
scene 
-
Critical Environmental and safetyFatality Fire suppressionInfrastructure Mass Mass operationsOnand law enforcementOperational Logistics and managementPublic emergency medical servicesSituational 
            
 xxxxxxxxxxxx
  
 
 type below directly relate to the Guide content and guidance.
  
  
 resiliencehazard 
20
 disaster 
/italic
term 
-
MitigationPlanning
Introduction
Community Longvulnerability reductionRisk and resilience assessmentThreats and identification
ed in bold    
xxxx
Operational Coordination
Public Information and Warning 
 
 s and 
information disruption
 
 search, and 
protective measures  
Protectioncontrol and identity  chain integrity and  
management for 
Access verificationCybersecurityIntelligence and sharingInterdiction and Physical Risk protection programactivitiesScreening, detectionSupply security
         
xxxxxxxx
 
 
 
sharing
: Core capabilities. The core capabilities indicat search, 
 
3
-
1
Prevention
Table 
Forensics and attributionIntelligence and information Interdiction and disruptionScreening, and detection
    
xxxx
 
Introduction 
1.6.2. National Preparedness System 
The National Preparedness System is the instrument employed to build, sustain, and deliver core 
capabilities and achieve the goal of a secure and resilient Nation. The guidance, programs, processes, and 
systems that support each component of the National Preparedness System enable a collaborative, whole 
community approach to national preparedness that engages individuals, families, communities, private 
and nonprofit sectors, faith-based organizations, and all levels of government. The Guide is a tool that 
supports the National Preparedness System by building and sustaining capabilities through multi-year 
resilience planning. 
1.6.3. National Infrastructure Protection Plan 
The National Infrastructure 
Protection Plan (NIPP) outlines Table 1-4: NIPP Critical Infrastructure Sectors 
how government and private 
sector owners and operators in x Chemical x Food and agriculture 
the critical infrastructure x Commercial facilities x Government facilities 
community collaborate to manage 
risk and to advance security and x Communications x Healthcare and public health 
resilience outcomes. The NIPP x Critical manufacturing x Information technology 
encourages partners to identify 
critical functions and resources x Dams x Nuclear reactors, materials, 
that impact their businesses and and waste 
x Defense industrial base 
communities to support x Transportation systems 
preparedness planning and x Emergency services 
capability development. The x Water and wastewater 
x Energy systems 
NIPP addresses 16 critical 
x
infrastructure sectors, as  Financial services 
identified in PPD-21 and  
presented in Table 1-4. The 16 
critical infrastructure sectors address both facilities and assets with specific services and resources that are 
important to national security.  
The Guide highlights several key sectors in the built environment, and it is applicable across the critical 
sectors at the community scale. Volume II of the Guide outlines several specific infrastructure systems 
(e.g., energy, communications, water and wastewater, transportation), identifies applicable standards and 
codes, and lists implementation strategies for community resilience plans. Chapter 12 (Buildings), 
includes generic guidance applicable to many other building dependent infrastructure sectors.  
1.6.4. Disaster Mitigation Assessment 
Nearly 24,000 communities, representing 80 % of the people in the , have developed 
mitigation plans in accordance with FEMA Disaster Mitigation Assessment guidance, based on the 
Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000 [DMA 2000]. Because mitigation is a component of resilience, these 
communities are also taking substantive steps toward planning for resilience. A planning process that 
includes a detailed consideration of the built environment as outlined in the Guide and incorporates 
ongoing mitigation planning demonstrates a comprehensive understanding of community resilience.  
Expanding the scope of existing community mitigation planning efforts, to resilience is the next logical 
step. Those who are already involved in mitigation activities have roles and responsibilities similar to 
21 
 
Introduction 
those needed for resilience. For example, the mitigation planning process emphasizes public participation 
in vetting mitigation strategies with targets, actions and priorities.  
1.6.5. Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment 
The Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (THIRA), outlined in Comprehensive 
Preparedness Guide 201, Second Edition [FEMA 2013], is a process that helps communities to 
understand the risks and capability requirements to address anticipated and unanticipated hazards. The 
THIRA process helps communities map their risks to the core capabilities identified in the National 
Preparedness Goal. This informs a variety of emergency management efforts, including emergency 
operations planning and mutual aid agreements. Results of the THIRA process can help with many 
preparedness activities, including mitigation opportunities that may reduce resources required in the 
future. Through THIRA, communities can identify opportunities to employ mitigation plans, projects, and 
insurance to reduce the loss of life and damage to property. The THIRA process can assist in carrying out 
Step 2 of the Guide, which focuses on understanding the situation. 
1.7. Other Community Resilience Guidance  
A number of resilience initiatives have focused on improving community resilience by developing 
guidance or assessment methodologies. In the , guidance documents that are often cited for 
use by communities include the SPUR Framework [2009], Baseline Resilience Indicators for 
Communities (BRIC) [Cutter et al 2014], the Community and Regional Resilience Institutes (CARRI) 
Community Resilience System [2013], the Oregon Resilience Plan [Oregon Seismic Safety Policy 
Advisory Commission 2013], NOAAs Coastal Resilience Index [Sempier et al. 2010], and the 
Communities Advancing Resilience Toolkit (CART) [Pfefferbaum et al 2013]. International initiatives 
include the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction Resilience Scorecard [UNIDSR 
2014] and the Rockefeller Foundations 100 Resilient Cities initiative [Arup 2014]. There are additional 
programs and initiatives that support community resilience are not addressed here.  
Both qualitative and quantitative approaches to resilience are available, many with scorecards or 
dashboards that reflect measurements of key resilience aspects. These visual representations provide a 
direct and simple way of presenting information for experts in the field or for decision makers. In general, 
most of these methodologies focus on social issues; in some cases, the focus is on one particular social 
service or system. 
Each of the initiatives cited above provides a set of dimensions or categories of community disaster 
resilience and, in many cases, includes a list of indicators or variables for each dimension. In cases where 
the methodologies involve engaging community stakeholders, process-oriented guidelines for 
implementation are included. For methodologies that are heavily quantitativetypically involving readily 
available data details are provided about strategies for data analysis and modeling. 
Most of these resilience initiatives only minimally integrate infrastructure systems and how they support 
social needs. They do not address dependencies between and among the social and built environments. 
This Guide is designed to address this critical issue. So even if a community is already engaged in 
resilience planning, this Guide can enhance those efforts.  
The American Planning Association document, Planning for Post-Disaster Recovery: Next Generation 
[APA 2014], discusses a recovery planning process and related issues. The APA reports that most disaster 
plans are standalone plans and are not integrated into other existing plans such as the communitys 
Comprehensive (General) Plan. Standalone plans are easier to develop, update, and implement. But an 
integrated plan brings resources together and links community resilience to other plans, which is essential 
22 
 
Introduction 
for understanding performance and issues at a community level. This Guide supports development of a 
comprehensive understanding of what is needed from the built environment for community resilience.  
Like all plans, a community resilience plan provides a starting point and a path forward. The community 
resilience plan should become a working document that is referenced and revised as needed. Many 
communities are starting to develop more comprehensive resilience plans as guidance and supporting 
tools become available. Figure 1-5 describes the Rockefeller Foundations 100 Resilient Cities initiative 
that is supporting resilience planning in cities around the world. 
100 Resilient Cities. Pioneered by the Rockefeller Foundation, 100 
Resilient Cities is dedicated to helping cities around the world 
become more resilient to physical, social and economic challenges 
caused by shocks and stresses that range from earthquakes, fires, 
and floods to high unemployment, violence, and chronic food and 
water shortage. By addressing both shocks and stresses, a city  
becomes more able to respond to adverse events and is better able to 
function by using the following four techniques. 
1. Establish a fully funded Chief Resilience Officer in city government to lead the citys resilience 
efforts 
2. Solicit expert support for development of a robust resilience strategy. 
3. Develop and implement resilience strategies with the help from public and private service providers, 
partners, and non-governmental organization (NGO) sectors. 
4. Network with other member cities and learn from each other. 
For more information, see www.100resilientcities.org. 
Figure 1-5: Community resilience planning initiatives. 
1.8. Guide Scope and Limitations 
This Guide helps communities to set customized, long-term goals and develop implementation strategies 
for improving the resilience of their buildings and infrastructure systems. The plans are informed by a 
community-level assessment of social needs, and the focus of this document is on buildings and 
infrastructure systems within a community.  
Risk assessment methodologies are not explicitly addressed in the document, but the six-step process for 
achieving community resilience is compatible with those approaches. Risk assessments can help to 
identify significant hazards and to understand associated vulnerabilities and consequences, which will 
support the development of a community resilience plan. There are several other important aspects of 
community resilience that fall outside the scope of this Guide: 
x Roles and responsibilities of federal, state, and local departments/agencies addressed through the 
National Preparedness Goal 
x Social, political and economic solutions or strategies to achieve a more resilient community 
 Methods for engaging and informing stakeholders and community members 
 Political processes that support development and adoption of community plans and laws, 
statutes, and ordinances 
23 
 
Introduction 
 Methods for obtaining financial resources and evaluating investment options to support 
community resilience strategies 
x Specifics on community services that are essential for community response and recovery: for 
example, banking and finance. Community services are discussed only to the extent they are 
supported by the built environment 
x Specifics on vulnerable populations and the ways in which they might be affected by a disaster 
event 
x Natural resources and the environment (natural capital), and the linkages to the built environment 
(built and physical capital), as well as other capitals (e.g., financial or economic, human, social, 
political, and cultural) 
x Cyber security and its role in the function of buildings and infrastructure systems. 
x Financial aspects of community resilience, including financing, insurance, policies, allocation, or 
management of such resources. 
1.9. References 
American Planning Association (APA 2014) Planning for Post Disaster Recovery: Next Generation, 
American Planning Association (APA), Washington, DC. 
Arup (2014) City Resilience Framework, The Rockefeller Foundation and Ove Arup & Partners 
International Limited, April, 
http://www.arup.com/~/media/Publications/Files/Publications/C/City_Resilience_Framework_pdf.ashx. 
Community and Regional Resilience Institute (CARRI 2013) Community Resilience System, Community 
and Regional Resilience Institute (CARRI 2013) Community Resilience System, 
http://www.resilientus.org/recent-work/community-resilience-system, http://www.resilientus.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/CRS-Final-Report.pdf.  
Cutter, S.L.; K.D. Ash; and C.T. Emrich (2014) The geographies of community disaster resilience, 
Global Environmental Change, 29, pp. 65-77. 
DMA (2000) Disaster Mitigation Act, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington, DC, 
https://www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/4596. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2009) FEMA P-765: Mitigation Assessment Team 
Report: Midwest Floods of 2008 in Iowa and Wisconsin, Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA), Washington, DC  
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2010) Developing and Maintaining Emergency 
Operations Plans, Comprehensive Preparedness Guide (CPG) 101, Version 2.0, November, Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2011a) Presidential Disaster Declarations, January 
10, 2000 to January 1, 2011, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC, 
https://www.hsdl.org/?view&did=12383. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2011b) National Disaster Recovery Framework, 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2013) Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk 
Assessment Guide, Comprehensive Preparedness Guide (CPG) 201, Second Edition, August, Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
24 
 
Introduction 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2015a) National Preparedness Goal, Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC, February 6, https://www.fema.gov/national-
preparedness-goal. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2015b) National Planning Frameworks, National 
Prevention Framework, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC, 
https://www.fema.gov/national-planning-frameworks. 
Flora, C.B, M. Emery, S. Fey, C. Bregendahl (2008) Community Capitals: A Tool for Evaluating 
Strategic Interventions and Projects, Encyclopedia of Rural America: The Land and People, Goreham 
ed., Grey House Publishing, Millerton, NY, pp. 1186-1187. 
McAllister, T.P. (2013) Developing Guidelines and Standards for Disaster Resilience of the Built 
Environment: A Research Needs Assessment, NIST TN 1795, National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 20899. 
National Science and Technology Council (2005) Grand Challenges for Disaster Reduction  A Report of 
the Subcommittee on Disaster Reduction, National Science and Technology Council, Executive Office of 
the President, Washington, DC. 
Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission (OSSPAC 2013) The Oregon Resilience Plan: 
Reducing Risk and Improving Recovery for the Next Cascadia Earthquake and Tsunami, Salem, OR, 
February, http://www.oregon.gov/OMD/OEM/osspac/docs/Oregon_Resilience_Plan_Final.pdf. 
Pfefferbaum, R.; B. Pfefferbaum; R.L. Van Horn; R.W. Klomp; F.H. Norris; and D.B. Reissman (2013) 
The Communities Advancing Resilience Toolkit (CART): An Intervention to Build Community 
Resilience to Disasters, Journal of Public Health Management & Practice, May/June 2013, Vol. 19, 
Issue 3, p 250258. 
PPD-21 (2013) Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-21, The White House, February 12, 2013, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/02/12/presidential-policy-directive-critical-
infrastructure-security-and-resil. 
PPD-8 (2011) Presidential Policy Directive, PPD-8  National Preparedness, The White House, March 
30, 2011, http://www.dhs.gov/presidential-policy-directive-8-national-preparedness. 
Ritchie, L.A. and D.A. Gill (2011) Considering Community Capitals in Disaster Recovery and 
Resilience, PERI Scope, Public Entity Risk Institute, 14(2), 
https://www.riskinstitute.org/peri/component/option,com_deeppockets/task,catContShow/cat,86/id,1086/I
temid,84/. 
San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association (SPUR 2009) When is a Building Safe 
Enough? San Francisco Urban Research Association, Issue 479, February 2009, 654 Mission Street, San 
Francisco, CA, http://www.spur.org, 
http://www.spur.org/sites/default/files/publications_pdfs/SPUR_Seismic_Mitigation_Policies.pdf. 
Sempier, T.T., D.L. Swann, R. Emmer, S.H. Sempier, and M. Schneider (2010) Coastal Community 
Resilience Index: A Community Self-Assessment, MAGSP-08-014, November, 
http://www.gulfofmexicoalliance.org/projects/files/83Community_Resilience_Index.pdf. 
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR 2014) Disaster Resilience Scorecard for 
Cities, Based on the Ten Essentials defined by the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster 
Risk Reduction (UNISDR) for Making Cities Resilient, Developed for The United Nations Office for 
Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) by IBM and AECOM, Version 1.5, March 10, 
http://www.unisdr.org/2014/campaign-cities/Resilience%20Scorecard%20V1.5.pdf. 
25 
 
Step 1: Form a Collaborative Planning Team 
2. Step 1: Form a Collaborative Planning Team 
A robust community resilience plan represents the interest of all stakeholders in the community and 
benefits from collaboration among community leaders, public and private stakeholders, and other 
interested community members. Active engagement by community 
stakeholders is vital in formulating  and carrying out  a successful 
resilience plan.  
The planning team may include a breadth of representatives: 
x Local government, such as community development, public works, 
and building departments 
x Public and private developers  
x Owners and operators of buildings and infrastructure systems; 
x Local business and industry representatives; 
x Representatives of the communitys social institutions (e.g., community organizations, non-
governmental organizations, business/industry groups, health, education, etc.) 
x Other stakeholders or interested community groups 
Much of the building stock and infrastructure systems, especially energy and communication systems, are 
privately owned, so collaboration among stakeholders is a necessity for success. As shown in Figure 2-1, 
while the planning team is focused at the community level, stakeholders in the planning process may 
range from individuals and families to national stakeholders, depending on the communitys resources 
and characteristics. For instance, roads and bridges typically are addressed at the county and state level, 
energy systems may range from the community to the regional level, and mitigation support may be 
provided at the state or national level.  
 
Figure 2-1: Levels of government and organization  
(adapted from John Plodinec [CARRI 2013]). 
Successful planning efforts to date have been led by a community official working with a planning team 
that develops recommendations through working groups of stakeholders and subject matter experts.  
As community resilience is an ongoing, long-term process, leadership by a dedicated community official 
is needed to provide continuity, elevate the importance of resilience, provide authority for convening 
stakeholders, and engage public support. The recent designation of a Chief Resilience Officer in many 
cities illustrates the type of leadership needed. Strong support and endorsement from elected officials 
26 
 
Step 1: Form a Collaborative Planning Team 
ensures that the planning process will have visibility, and is more likely to lead to community engagement 
through stakeholder participation. 
Important contributors include local champions who are highly connected and engaged with 
neighborhood, business, or community groups, or who are actively engaged in other community-based 
activities. They can advocate for support from and participation by other community stakeholders, and 
can help reach out to and develop an understanding with groups representing diverse views and 
experiences within the community and with the public at large. They can be influential in rallying the 
community around planning for resilience.  
Community engagement is essential to the success of community resilience planning and implementation. 
The activities highlighted in Figure 2-2 illustrate active community engagement in their resilience 
planning.  
Resilient San Francisco (SF). Resilient SF was organized within the Mayors 
office and solicited support from the Harvard Kennedy School. It is a citizens 
advisory group formed by the Chief Building Inspector, and it accepted guidance 
from a self-appointed planning group from the San Francisco Planning and Urban 
Research Association [SPUR 2009]. SPUR contributed a Resilient City Plan to the 
advisory group that developed a Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety that 
lead to the creation of the Earthquake Safety Improvement Program and a 30-year 
program for achieving resilience within the citys privately owned buildings. This 
program, in conjunction with the Citys Capital Planning Process and Lifelines 
Council, established a holistic effort toward resilience. It is now overseen by a  
Chief Resilience Officer and the Earthquake Safety Implementation Program 
Office, which is a part of the Citys Executive Branch.  
Cedar Rapids, Iowa. The Cedar Rapids Framework Plan for Reinvestment and 
Revitalization [Cedar Rapids 2014] was initiated and led by the City Council 
following the 2008 floods, and was an expansion of their ongoing City wide 
planning efforts. Early in the process, three open houses for the River Corridor 
Redevelopment Plan were organized to receive feedback for the residents on the 
preliminary community analysis. The planning process included all the related City 
departments and received input from a Recovery and Reinvestment Coordinating 
team, various coordinating groups, committees, and organizations, representatives 
from the medical community, the railroads, and other industrial stakeholders. The 
plan is being implemented and has already generated significant improvements in 
the City.  
Oregon Resilience Plan. The Oregon Plan was initiated by the Oregon State 
Legislature and led by the Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission 
[OSSPAC 2013]. The commission includes 19 appointees of the Governor who 
represent the various disciplines related to seismic safety policy including 
emergency managers, transportation, land conservation, housing and buildings, 
architects, engineers, and stakeholders from businesses, schools, the Port of 
Portland, and the construction industry. Planning work was organized around a 
number of task groups to address the seismic and tsunami hazards, business and 
workforce continuity, coastal communities, critical and essential buildings, and 
transportation, energy, water and wastewater systems. The report was accepted by 
the State legislature in 2014 as a framework for communities to implement.   
Figure 2-2: Examples of community resilience activities with strong community engagement 
27 
 
Step 1: Form a Collaborative Planning Team 
The involvement of community members is a measure of a communitys social capital. The communitys 
social assets and resources can facilitate information sharing, provide a conduit for social support, and 
enhance the capacity for collective action through social networks, associations, and the reciprocity and 
trust generated by them among individuals and groups. Engagement of community members can 
contribute to resilience by enhancing the sense of belonging and strengthening bonds between individuals 
and groups within communities (see Chapter 10, Volume II). Similar to cultural capital, social capital 
reflects the convergence of shared values in a community. It is especially valuable because it enhances a 
communitys ability to work toward collective goalsmany of which may increase other forms of 
capital.  
Community engagement facilitates understanding by the community, raises awareness of resilience 
activities, and can foster buy-in and support for important resilience projects, bond issues, and legislation. 
In the short-term, understanding of and support for resilience efforts can promote increased perceptions of 
safety and security within the community. In the long-term, these perceptions can lead to stronger 
community identity and a higher quality of life.  
The planning team and its related working groups will vary in size and breadth depending on the 
community. Team members from agencies with authority to plan, regulate development and the built 
environment, and make recommendations and decisions can provide valuable input to the planning 
process and offer knowledge about executing strategies. Stakeholders from particular interests may join 
working groups with the intent of developing specific recommendations for consideration by the planning 
team. Their input will be complemented by subject matter experts,  
Table 2-1 through Table 2-3 provide examples of those that may be included on the planning team or in 
the stakeholder working groups. The importance and potential contributions of these stakeholders to the 
resilience planning are described briefly. Their roles may vary among communities, depending on each 
stakeholders envisioned role and their current authorities or responsibilities. All will need to share 
information and collaborate to develop a shared understanding of the community.  
Guidance related to building a planning team is documented in the FEMA Local Mitigation Planning 
Handbook [FEMA 2013]. Many departments, businesses, and groups may already be working on aspects 
of planning to achieve resilience, such as land use planning, long-term economic development, 
mitigation, building inspections, or emergency management, and business continuity management [ISO 
2015].  
Leadership that promotes collaboration among all stakeholders is needed to promote and embed resilience 
at all levels in the community. Public and private stakeholders need to work together to successfully plan, 
implement, and achieve community resilience and long-term goals. 
28 
 
Step 1: Form a Collaborative Planning Team 
Table 2-1: Examples of local government stakeholders who could be included in planning team  
Provides leadership, encourages collaboration among departments, and serves as the 
link to the stakeholders in organizing, compiling, and vetting the plan throughout the 
Office of the Chief community. Also serves as the point of contact for interactions with neighboring 
Executive (e.g., Mayor)  communities within the region and the state. A Chief Resilience Officer or other 
leader within the office should be considered for leading the effort.  
City Council or Board of Represent the diversity of community opinion, adopts the needed plans, and enacts 
Supervisors  legislation for needed mandatory mitigation efforts. 
Identify appropriate codes and standards for adoption (where state codes are not 
mandated); reviews building plans and provides inspection services to assure proper 
construction; and provides post-event inspection services aimed at restoring 
Building Department  functionality as soon as possible. The department also may develop and maintain a 
geographic information system (GIS)-based mapping database of community 
physical infrastructure, social institutions, and relationships between the two.  
Department of Public Responsible for publicly owned buildings, many roads, and infrastructure, and 
Works  identify emergency response and recovery routes.  
Responsible for codes and enforcement of construction standards related to fire 
Fire departments/ districts  safety and bring expertise related to urban fires, wildfires, and fire following hazard 
events. 
Identify open spaces available for emergency or interim use for housing and other 
Parks and Recreation  neighborhood functions. 
Public Utilities Responsible for overseeing private and public owned utility systems, setting rates 
Commission  and service levels, and assisting in developing recovery goals. 
Identify pre-event land use and mitigation opportunities and post-event recovery 
Planning Department  opportunities that will improve the citys layout and reduce vulnerabilities through 
repair and reconstruction projects and future development.  
Emergency Management Identify what is needed from the physical infrastructure to streamline response and 
Agency and Emergency recovery of social functions and institutions within the community. 
Operations Center (EOC)  
Boards of Education, Represent all levels of education and clarify the systems tolerance for disruptions 
Trustees and Regents  and its ability to operate under temporary conditions.  
Human Services Identify services vital to support community member needs, including senior, youth, 
Department (or people with disabilities, and family services and programs (including childcare).  
equivalent) 
29 
 
Step 1: Form a Collaborative Planning Team 
Table 2-2: Examples of business and service professionals who could be included on planning team 
Represent business and industry interests and includes business leaders who will 
Chambers of Commerce bring a clear perspective on the economic impact of potential disasters as well as the 
and  industry associations impact of resilience plans.  
Community business Represent large and small businesses that support the neighborhoods, provide jobs, 
districts  and play a key role in community recovery.  
Provide building and housing owners perspective on resilience and recovery in 
Building owners, and terms of their needs for labor, buildings, utilities, and other infrastructure systems, as 
managers  well as how their needs influence the performance levels selected. 
Includes power, communications, water, wastewater, and transportation providers. 
Key to rapid recovery of functionality, and will bring perspective on changes needed 
in current regulations and rate limitations. Collaboration among providers is 
Utility providers  essential to understand the community needs and priorities for recovery, as well as 
shared dependencies. Infrastructure systems may be represented by staff from 
outside the community. 
Includes public health officials, providers of acute, sub-acute, rehabilitation, mental 
health, behavioral and end of life care. Bring clarity to healthcare services that are 
Health  being provided before, and those that are needed immediately after, a significant 
event and throughout the recovery period.  
Architects and urban Bring a vision and expertise for an improved community that supports transit, 
planners  housing, vibrant and livable neighborhoods, and improved quality of life.  
Determine design and performance capabilities for the built environment and assists 
in developing suitable standards and guidelines. Can help establish desired 
Engineers  performance goals and the likely performance anticipated from the existing built 
environment. 
Provide perspective on the feasibility and consequences of changing building and 
Developers and housing design and construction practices. Also offer perspective from their clean-up 
construction professionals  and reconstruction activities after a disaster. 
Reflect the needs of a key player in disseminating important information about 
Media  response and recovery efforts, as well as the resilience process and progress, to the 
community.  
30 
 
Step 1: Form a Collaborative Planning Team 
Table 2-3: Examples of community and volunteer organizations that could be included on planning 
team 
Bring members concerns to governments, advocate and monitor policies, and 
encourage participation in resilience-related efforts by providing information to 
Non-governmental members. May include non-profit, voluntary groups organized on a local, national or 
Organizations (NGOs)  international level. May perform a variety of service and humanitarian functions that 
support other social institutions, especially those that provide services to vulnerable 
and at-risk populations.  
Serve as a primary forum where organizations share knowledge and resources 
National Voluntary throughout the disaster preparedness cycle to help survivors and their communities. 
Organizations Active in These are non-profit, non-partisan, membership-based organizations that help to 
Disaster (VOADs)  build resiliency in communities nationwide. 
Provide neighborhood and resident views, including homeowners, renters, and 
Community associations vulnerable populations 
Community Service Offer insights based on their role as volunteer, membership-based groups that 
Organizations (CSOs) and provide services to the communitys members and frequently play an important role 
religious/cultural groups  in the post-disaster environment. 
2.1. References 
City of Cedar Rapids (2014) Flood Recovery Planning, Cedar Rapids: City of Five Seasons, City of 
Cedar Rapids, Iowa, http://www.cedar-rapids.org/government/departments/community-
development/floodrecoveryplanning/Pages/default.aspx. 
Community and Regional Resilience Institute (CARRI 2013) Community Resilience System, Community 
and Regional Resilience Institute (CARRI 2013) Community Resilience System, 
http://www.resilientus.org/recent-work/community-resilience-system, http://www.resilientus.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/CRS-Final-Report.pdf. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2013) Local Mitigation Planning Handbook, March, 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington DC. 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO 2015) ISO/CD 22316 Societal Security - 
Organizational Resilience - Principles and Guidelines, 
http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=50053. 
Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission (2013) The Oregon Resilience Plan: Reducing Risk 
and Improving Recovery for the Next Cascadia Earthquake and Tsunami, Salem, OR, February, 
http://www.oregon.gov/OMD/OEM/osspac/docs/Oregon_Resilience_Plan_Final.pdf. 
San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association (SPUR 2009) When is a Building Safe 
Enough? San Francisco Urban Research Association, Issue 479, February 2009, 654 Mission Street, San 
Francisco, CA, http://www.spur.org, 
http://www.spur.org/sites/default/files/publications_pdfs/SPUR_Seismic_Mitigation_Policies.pdf. 
31 
 
Step 2: Understand the Situation 
3. Step 2: Understand the Situation 
This Guide is based upon a fundamental premise: the social functions and needs of a community should 
drive the requirements of the built environment for a community to be resilient. 
The built environment is an essential part of a communitys resilience. Social functions and institutions, 
including family/kinship, education, health, government, economy, media, other community-based 
organizations, rely on buildings and infrastructure systems before, during, and after a hazard event occurs. 
Key buildings and infrastructure systems must be functional to support neighborhood restoration, to care 
for vulnerable populations, and to enable the communitys economy to recover and thrive.  
Gaining a comprehensive understanding of a community is essential for effective resilience planning. 
That includes identifying and characterizing social and civil components: 
x Social dimensions, including community demographics and how social institutions meet 
community members their needs prior to hazard events and during recovery 
x Buildings and the infrastructure systems  the built environment  that supports the functions of 
these social institutions 
In this second planning step, the team identifies and characterizes both components, and identifies 
important links and dependencies between them.  
3.1. Identify and Characterize the Social Dimensions 
The social needs of a community provide the basis for establishing 
performance goals for the built environment. Understanding those 
needs involves identifying and characterizing community members, 
their needs, and the social institutions that exist to meet those 
needs. This can be done in four sub-steps: 
1. Characterize community members and their present and 
future needs. This includes population demographics and 
locations, economic indicators, social vulnerabilities, social 
capital, and their needs. Short-and long-term needs,  
including potential growth, should be considered. 
2. Identify social institutions and systems within the community, including their functions, the 
particular needs they meet, and any gaps in institutional and organizational capacity that could be 
improved by changes to the built environment. 
3. Identify dependencies among and within social institutions. 
4. Identify key social and economic community metrics, including methods to track the impact of 
community planning and improvements. 
Details and examples appear below. 
Characterize the population. This involves taking stock of the communitys demographics (e.g., age, 
health, education, income, employment status, home ownership/rental/temporary housing, language and 
culture) and linking these with individuals geographic locations within the community, determining the 
communitys economic profile or indicators (e.g., the industries present within the community), 
identifying social assets and capacities (e.g., health clinics and pharmacies, educational programs), and 
vulnerabilities (e.g., mobility issues, renting, lacking recovery resources, living or working in hazard-
prone areas), and defining the needs of different groups in the community. A generalized hierarchy of 
32 
 
Step 2: Understand the Situation 
human needs within a community is presented in Chapter 10 (Volume II), that is based on Maslows 
approach. Human needs are physiological (e.g., water, food, and shelter), safety and security, belonging, 
and growth and achievement. Although all needs are important, some are more urgent or time sensitive 
than others in the context of resilience. The resilience team should focus foremost, but not exclusively, on 
the more fundamental and time-sensitive needs. 
Additionally, because resilience planning can involve long-term measures and modifications to the built 
environment, changes and trends in community demographics, geographic locations, vulnerabilities, and 
local needs over time should be considered.  
Identify social institutions. These can include family/kinship, economics, government, health, education, 
community service organizations, religious and cultural organizations (or other organizations that support 
belief systems), and the media. Institutions are organized in many different ways to serve community 
needs. It is important for the resilience planning team to identify the communitys various social 
institutions and to understand how they work within the community (i.e., identify the services they 
provide and their dependencies).  
At this stage, the planning team can begin to identify gaps in capacity within the social institutions: 
situations in which institutions and services would be unlikely or unable to meet all the needs of the 
community and to maintain services after a hazard event. The team next identifies gaps in social capacity 
that could be reduced by a change or improvement to the built environment. For example, the community 
might benefit and be able to better meet its social needs if housing is relocated outside a flood zone or 
future development is restricted within that flood zone. 
Strengths and weaknesses in the ability of social institutions to provide services to the community need to 
be clearly identified. For example, critical services delivered by healthcare institutions or emergency 
responders are vital to meet urgent needs during recovery. The capacity of these institutions to function at 
all times (including recovery) needs to be examined in detail, fully understood, and any improvements 
that are needed should be agreed upon. The population that commutes into the community to fulfill 
critical functions and enable business to continue or to resume operations, should be identified. Such an 
analysis should also include consideration of their transportation modes, routes and dependencies (e.g., 
availability of fuel).  
Identify dependencies. Given that social institutions are linked in many ways, a disruption in the built 
environment that affects one social institution may also affect others. Therefore, planners should identify 
dependencies among and within social institutions to determine which functions are most critical during 
recovery. Each community is different. Chapter 10 (Volume II) provides examples of dependencies to 
consider. 
Identify metrics. Communities should identify methods (or measures or metrics) to track the progress of 
social and economic aspects of community resilience and improvement activities. The basic questions that 
community metrics may help to answer include: 
x How resilient are the communitys social and economic institutions? 
x Will the communitys decisions and investments actually improve resilience? If so, how 
significant will the difference be? 
Social and economic metrics can help community decision-makers understand the implications of 
community decisions for planning, siting, design, construction, operation, protection, maintenance, repair, 
and restoration of the built environment. Social and economic-based resilience metrics can be quantitative 
or descriptive. The result can be presented as an overall resilience-related score or as a set of separately 
reported scores across a broad spectrum of physical, economic, and social dimensions. Examples of 
resilience metrics for social and economic systems, and existing community resilience assessment 
methodologies are provided in Chapter 17 (Volume II). 
33 
 
Step 2: Understand the Situation 
In understanding the community, the planning team also characterizes the built environment, as discussed 
in the following section. Characterizing the social dimensions and the built environment may occur in 
parallel. 
3.2. Characterize the Built Environment 
Characterizing the built environment includes 
identifying key attributes and dependencies for existing 
buildings and infrastructure systems within the 
community. Depending on their size, community 
building and public works departments and utilities may 
have much of the needed information available through 
their GIS (Geographic Information System) applications 
or other databases.  
 
Data and information that will be needed to characterize 
the current condition of the built environment includes 
the owner, location(s), current use, age, construction types, zoning, maintenance and upgrades, and 
applicable codes, standards, and regulations, both at the time of design and for current practice. 
Information about dependence on other systems, subsystems, or branches of systems, will contribute to an 
understanding of how the built environment is expected to perform if one of the systems, or a branch of 
the system, stops providing services. 
Another important piece of information is the location of these structures throughout the community. 
GIS-based maps can help communities understand whether their buildings or infrastructure systems are 
located in higher-risk areas. For instance, many communities were established before flood zones were 
mapped, and consequently, have buildings and infrastructure systems subject to flood damage. Other 
communities have buildings and infrastructure systems located near seismic faults, and may not perform 
well if a significant seismic event occurs. Alternatively, a period of rapid growth may have exceeded the 
infrastructure systems capacity or may have resulted in development that lacked adequate adoption or 
enforcement of local codes and regulations. 
Buildings. Buildings can be characterized individually and as groups, or clusters. The term cluster refers 
to a set of buildingsand supporting infrastructure systemsthat serve a common function such as 
housing, healthcare, retail, etc. Clusters are not necessarily geographically co-located, and may be 
distributed throughout the community. Characterizing a communitys building stock involves identifying 
the number of buildings within the community by building type, occupancy, and use. Additional 
information important to establishing performance and recovery times may include construction types that 
might not perform well, such as unreinforced masonry or soft story construction in seismic zones, or a 
lack of positive ties (e.g., hurricane clips) to avoid wind uplift damage. See Chapter 12 in Volume II for 
additional considerations in characterizing the building stock. 
Transportation. In addition to roads and bridges, community transportation systems may include rail 
systems, airports, coastal or river ports, pipelines, waterways, or trucking hubs. Many communities 
maintain their local roads and rely on various owners and operators to maintain other transportation 
systems. For instance, while counties and states own and maintain most highways, regional authorities 
may mange airports and shipping ports. Most rail lines are independently owned and operated, sometimes 
privately or by separate public authorities. Information from owners and operators on the transportation 
infrastructure is needed to address multiple performance and recovery issues. This information can be 
used to determine dependencies, meet anticipated usage (e.g., traffic loads on evacuation routes), and 
provide redundancy for meeting transport needs (e.g., temporary energy sources and alternate routes). 
Transportation systems may serve different roles in each phase of recovery. For example, emergency 
34 
 
Step 2: Understand the Situation 
response routes, evacuation pathways, and supply routes for restoration may be different. See Chapter 13 
in Volume II for additional considerations in characterizing transportation systems. 
Energy. Energy systems include electric power and fuel systems. Electric power systems range from 
municipally owned and operated systems to private regional systems. These systems include power 
generation, transmission, and distribution; distribution systems are located within the boundaries of 
communities, but generation and transmission systems are typically located outside the community,  
unless they are municipally owned. Coordination between owners and operators of energy systems 
regarding system performance and restoration sequencing during and immediately after an event is 
fundamental to community resilience planning. For many communities, understanding the sequence of 
power restoration is key to planning community recovery. Fuel supply mechanisms and distribution 
systems also need to be characterized. Fuel may be supplied by tankers, trucks, or pipelines. The total 
amount of fuel required by the community may change during recovery if temporary power sources, such 
as generators, are used. Recent growth of decentralized energy sources, such as microgrids and home 
solar energy systems, also should be taken into account over the long-term. See Chapter 14 in Volume II 
for additional considerations in characterizing energy systems. 
Communication. Communication services include internet, cellular, and wireline phone services as well 
as the cable, satellite, and broadcast modes relied upon by media operations. Communication companies 
are privately owned and many communities rely on multiple providers. Smaller, regional companies may 
share infrastructure with a larger, sometimes national, company. Communication infrastructure includes 
central offices and other equipment-based facilities to direct and process calls and data. It also includes 
cables, cell towers, and other systems to transmit and distribute calls and data. As is the case with electric 
power, distribution systems are within community boundaries. Coordination with owners and operators 
about communication systems performance and recovery is essential to resilience planning. See Chapter 
15 in Volume II for additional considerations in characterizing communication systems. 
Water and wastewater. Water systems are supplied by either surface or ground water. They include 
treatment plants and pipelines. Wastewater systems collect waste through a separate system of pipelines 
and pump stations connected to a wastewater treatment plant, which is located near a body of water used 
for post-treatment discharge. These systems typically are owned and operated at the local level, either by 
the communities, special authorities, or associations of homeowners. Information on system age, 
maintenance, location, and service area is readily available in many communities. Many water systems 
are older and may need replacement; for aging systems with frequent failures, the risk of failure will 
increase during certain hazard events. The performance of older buried systems may well deserve 
additional planning options for community recovery. Water sources may be local, or they may be shared 
with other communities. Having shared water sources may require collaboration with nearby communities 
for daily water supplies and recovery plans. See Chapter 16 in Volume II for additional considerations in 
characterizing water and wastewater systems. 
Dependencies. Effective resilience planning demands a thorough understanding of building and 
infrastructure system dependencies to minimize negative impacts while key functions are restored. There 
are multiple dimensions of dependency. Interactions between and among infrastructure systems can 
depend on a number of factors. Traditionally, dependencies consider the physical and functional 
relationship between different systems (e.g., drinking water systems require electricity to operate pumps, 
communications systems need power to operate, crews needed to repair damage to electrical distribution 
systems need access via roads that may be blocked). See Chapter 11 in Volume II for additional 
considerations in characterizing system dependencies. 
Identify metrics. Communities should identify methods (ideally including meaningful metrics) to track 
the progress of buildings and infrastructure systems activities related to community resilience. Most 
service providers and communities track reliability of service (e.g., power or communication systems) 
during normal operations or service restoration (e.g., restored transportation route of water line) following 
35 
 
Step 2: Understand the Situation 
system damage (see Chapter 17 in Volume II). This Guide uses time to recovery of function as the 
primary metric for community resilience.  
3.3. Link Social Dimensions to the Built Environment 
Once the social dimensions and built environment are characterized, communities identify links between 
the social institutions and their services and the buildings and infrastructure systems during day-to-day 
operations and during the recovery process. Some institutions rely more heavily on the built environment 
than others. For example, healthcare institutions may find it difficult to provide services outside of 
hospitals or other buildings on a longer-term basis because specialized equipment often relies on power 
and/or water, and controlled (sterile) environments frequently are needed to perform medical procedures.  
In this step, a community identifies the ways in which the built environment supports each social 
institution. This process involves understanding the purpose of the built environment for each institution, 
how that purpose is actualized, and the direct and indirect consequences for individuals, groups, and the 
community when the built environment is degraded. Chapter 10 (Volume II) contains examples of 
linkages between social institutions and the built environment, specifically buildings, transportation, 
water/wastewater, power/energy, and communication systems. These linkages may differ under normal 
circumstances and after a hazard event.  
Planning teams should identify external and internal dependencies that affect successful implementation 
of the community resilience plan and desired outcomes. These dependencies need to be taken into account 
in the next step when the team sets goals and objectives, because those dependencies contribute to the 
resilience plans uncertainty and risk.  
By considering these linkages, the planning team can begin to identify building clusters, and the 
infrastructure systems that support those clusters. For instance, building performance during a hazard and 
during recovery can be considered for individual buildings that provide a critical service and for clusters 
of housing or commercial facilities. Additionally, the service or function served by the cluster before the 
hazard event may change during recovery. For example, school facilities often are used as emergency 
housing for several weeks after an event. Temporary alternate uses of facilities should be taken into 
consideration as because building cluster performance goals are set during the next step in the process. 
36 
 
Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
4. Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
4.1. Goals for Community Resilience 
Community resilience should be based on long-term community growth 
and development goals. Each community should define its own long-
term planning horizon, depending on its existing infrastructure, 
anticipated plans for improvements, and resources. For the built 
environment, renewal or replacement of existing buildings and 
infrastructure systems often takes place over 30 to 100 years, depending 
on the building or infrastructure systems use and the type of 
construction.  
Having long-term community-level goals  such as minimizing  
disruptions to daily life, attracting new business, and improving recovery 
from hazard events  guides a diverse set of stakeholders as they develop 
resilience plans. Achieving the long-term goals of the community is made possible by developing 
performance goals for the built environment and the supported social functions, strategies for achieving 
those goals, and priorities for administrative and construction solutions. The desired, long-term 
performance goals are expressed in the Guide as time to recovery of a function. Time is a metric that is 
readily and broadly understood, and that can be evaluated.  
There are two categories of performance when it comes to the built environment: 1) desired performance 
to be achieved over time through the resilience plan, and 2) anticipated performance if an event were to 
occur before the resilience plan was implemented.  
To determine where shortfalls, or gaps, exist, the anticipated performance of the existing built 
environment needs to be estimated for the prevailing community hazards. Desired performance goals, 
anticipated performance of the existing built environment, and recovery phases, times, and costs for a 
hazard event provide a more complete basis for communities to assess expected gaps in performance, to 
prioritize improvements, and to allocate resources.  
The Guide recommends that performance be evaluated at three levels  routine, design, and extreme  for 
each hazard. This approach helps communities understand performance across a reasonable range of 
hazard levels. Better understanding of how the built environment performs and recovers over a range of 
hazard levels further informs community decisions about priorities.  
4.1.1. Establish Long-Term Community Goals 
Long-term community goals guide the resilience planning, prioritization, resource allocations, and 
implementation process. The goals are high level statements of outcomes that are desired to improve the 
community. Examples of these types of goal statements include the following: 
x Improve resilience of an infrastructure system to improve community reliability and functions. 
x Improve or add redundancy to a transportation route that is vulnerable to damage and minimize 
travel impacts on residents and supply impacts on businesses. 
x Revitalize an existing area through improvements that make the community more resilient. 
37 
 
Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
4.1.2. Establish Desired Performance Goals 
Setting desired performance goals depends on determining a couple of important factors: (1) an 
acceptable level of damage for a particular hazard level (performance level) and (2) a corresponding time 
to restore full functionality. Performance levels address life safety, which are the focus of building and 
fire codes, as well as post-event functionality, which generally is not covered by those codes. Determining 
desired time to recover functionality (also shortened to recovery time) helps to prioritize repair and 
reconstruction efforts. Additionally, performance goals should consider the role of a facility or system on 
local, regional, and possibly national and international needs. For instance, if a production plant in a 
community is the national supplier for a particular product, the impact of damage to that plant extends 
well beyond the community.  
The term cluster is used to denote groups of buildings or infrastructure systems serving a common 
function. However, a cluster does not necessarily mean that the buildings or infrastructure systems are 
geographically co-located. Examples are residential housing, schools, or healthcare facilities and 
supporting infrastructure. Such clusters serve community social institutions and should have similar 
performance goals.  
Setting desired performance goals for safety and functionality of the built environment informs resilience 
plans for new construction as well as for existing buildings and infrastructure systems. New construction 
that meets the desired performance goals helps to improve a communitys resilience over time. For 
existing construction, having clear performance goals helps identify clusters that may benefit from 
retrofits, relocation, or other measures to ensure that these clusters provide the needed social service.  
Recovery phases. Recovery times for building clusters and infrastructure systems are organized around 
sequential recovery phases. The Guide uses the recovery phases as defined by the FEMA National 
Disaster Recovery Framework [FEMA 2011], as shown in Figure 4-1: short-term, intermediate and long-
term. The first phase usually focuses on rescue, stabilization, and preparing for recovery and is expected 
to occur over a period of days. The second phase focuses on restoring the neighborhoods, workforce, and 
caring for the vulnerable populations and extends for weeks to months. The third phase relates to 
restoring the communitys economy, social institutions and physical infrastructure, and may continue for 
years after the event. Activities during each recovery phase may overlap in planning and execution. 
 
Figure 4-1: National Disaster Recovery Framework (NDRF) recovery continuum [FEMA 2011] 
Performance levels for buildings. To ensure compatibility with codes and standards, common definitions 
of performance levels should be used for buildings and infrastructure systems. These range from safe and 
operational to unsafe. Table 4-1 provides definitions for building cluster performance levels that are used 
in the Guide. These were designated originally by SPUR [2009] to define the seismic performance of 
buildings. 
38 
 
Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
Table 4-1: Performance level definitions for building clusters 
Performance Level  Definition 
A. Safe and These facilities incur minor damage and continue to function without interruption. 
operational Essential facilities need this level of function. 
These facilities experience moderate damage to their finishes, contents and support 
systems. They receive green tags from qualified inspectors and are safe to occupy after a 
B. Safe and usable hazard event. This performance is suitable for shelter-in-place residential buildings, 
during repair neighborhood businesses and services, and other businesses or services deemed 
important to community recovery. 
These facilities meet minimum safety goals, but remain closed until they are repaired. 
These facilities receive yellow tags
C. Safe and not usable  from qualified inspectors. This performance may be 
suitable for some of the facilities that support the communitys economy. Demand for 
business and market factors will determine when they need to be functional. 
D. Unsafe  partial or These facilities are dangerous because the extent of damage may lead to casualties. 
complete collapse These buildings receive red tags from qualified inspectors. 
Functional categories. Categorizing community functions based on the support they lend to recovery is 
helpful when determining desired performance goals for the built environment. Table 4-2 gives an 
example of assigning building clusters by recovery phases. Infrastructure systems that support the clusters 
are not listed, but should be considered.   
Four functional categories are suggested for inclusion in the three phases of recovery. Building clusters 
are assigned to one of those categories. The four categories include critical facilities and emergency 
housing (short-term), workforce housing and neighborhood restoration (intermediate term), and 
community restoration (long-term). Communities should consider human and social needs when 
assigning building clusters to the three recovery phases.  
While three recovery phases are designated, there will be considerable overlap in their initiation and 
completion, as indicated in Figure 4-1. It is conceivable that all three recovery phases could start shortly 
after the hazard event.  
Functionality levels for building clusters. Although individual buildings may be assigned desired 
performance levels that reflect their role in the community, the overall ability of a building cluster to 
serve its social institutions can be measured by how many or what percentage of buildings in the cluster 
are functioning. For purposes of planning, it is helpful to set goals for three levels of functionality based 
on the percentage of buildings in the cluster that are functional, as defined in Table 4-3. This process 
allows a community to define the shape of the recovery curves shown in Figure 4-1 for each recovery 
phase. When building clusters only have a few buildings, it may be appropriate to directly measure the 
percentage of service restored, rather than the number of buildings with restored functionality within a 
cluster. 
In the post-event environment, 90 % functional can be considered full restoration. In many communities, 
approximately 10 % of the buildings are out of service for a variety of reasons at any given time 
[OSSPAC 2013]. The gradual, phased recovery levels in Figure 4-1 also show that all buildings in a 
cluster are not expected to recover at the same time. Chapter 12 in Volume II provides information on 
building cluster identification, and considerations for setting performance levels.  
39 
 
Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
Table 4-2: Sample assignment of building clusters by functional category and recovery phases 
Critical Facilities  
x Disaster debris and recycling centers  x Hospitals and essential healthcare facilities  
x Emergency operations centers x Police and fire stations 
 Emergency Housing  
Term
-x Animal shelters x Nursing homes, transitional housing 
x Banking facilities (location known by x Public shelters  
Shortcommunity) x Residential shelter-in-place  
x Food distribution centers x Shelter for emergency response and recovery 
x Faith and community-based organizations workers 
x Gas stations (location known by 
community) 
Housing/Neighborhoods/Business  
 x Buildings or space for social services (e.g., x Local grocery stores (location known by 
child services) and prosecution activities community) 
x Daycare centers  x Medical provider offices 
x Essential city services facilities x Neighborhood retail stores 
Intermediate
x Houses of worship x Residential housing  
x Local Businesses  x Schools 
 Community Recovery  
Term
-x Commercial and industrial businesses x Resilient landscape repair, redesign, 
reconstruction, repairs to domestic 
x Non-emergency city services 
Longenvironment 
Table 4-3: Functionality levels for building clusters 
Functionality Performance Level 
30% functional Minimum number needed to initiate the activities assigned to the cluster 
60% functional Minimum number needed to initiate usual operations 
90% functional Minimum number needed to declare cluster is operating at normal capacity 
Supporting infrastructure systems. Building clusters require service from supporting infrastructure 
systems to be functional. In the short-term, temporary solutions, such as emergency generators or portable 
water supplies, may be used to restore service and functionality. Communities are encouraged to set 
functionality levels (Table 4-3) for the recovery of infrastructure systems so they support the building 
40 
 
Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
cluster recovery. The focus should be on system performance in terms of the percentage of capacity 
provided at the 30 %, 60 %, and 90 % milestones for the various building clusters. Consideration should 
be given to redundancies inherent in each infrastructure system and the consequence of the disruptuon.  
New construction and retrofit. The procedure for setting performance levels for buildings, building 
clusters, and supporting infrastructure systems is directly applicable to new construction and retrofit 
projects. The design criteria established for those projects should be based on the same performance goal 
for the building cluster they support. To achieve long-term community resilience, all new construction 
should be designed to the community-designated performance level. 
4.1.3. Define Community Hazards and Levels 
With desired performance goals established, the next step is to determine the expected response of the 
existing buildings and infrastructure systems to a communitys prevailing hazards, which may include 
natural, human-caused, or technological hazards. The community resilience plan is anchored to the design 
event  that is, the hazard level used to design buildings and other structures  but consideration of 
routine as well as extreme events may identify additional issues to be considered. The planning team is 
encouraged to evaluate multiple hazard levels to ensure comprehensive planning for a range of possible 
hazard conditions that may occur. 
Prevailing hazards. Each community has its own prevalent hazards to consider when planning for long-
term community resilience. The following is a partial list of hazards that communities may face:  
x Wind  wind storms, hurricanes, tornadoes 
x Earthquake  ground shaking, ground faults, landslides, liquefaction 
x Inundation  river flood, flash flood, coastal flood, tsunami 
x Fire  urban/building, wildfire, and fire following another hazard event 
x Snow or Rain  snow storms, ice storms, blizzards, drifts, ice dams, freezes or thaws, rain storms 
that overwhelm drainage systems 
x Technological or Human-caused  blasts, vehicular (including rail) impacts, toxic environmental 
contamination as a result of industrial or other accidents as well as due to clean-up/disposal 
methods after a hazard event  
Many of these hazards, such as wind, earthquake, and snow, have specified design criteria in current 
codes and standards for the built environment. However, some hazards do not yet have specified design 
criteria, such as tornadoes. 
Each community should identify and plan for prevailing hazards that may have significant negative 
impact on the built environment. Communities may have already identified their prevailing hazards when 
developing a natural hazard mitigation plan, emergency operations plan, continuity of operations plan, or 
Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (THIRA) Guide [CPG 201, FEMA 2013b]. 
Historical data may also be useful for understanding potential hazards and consequences, but should be 
interpreted and used carefully. Historical events are specific examples of the range of possible future 
events a community may face. Data on damage from historical events depend on a number of factors, 
including the density and condition of the built environment, the intensity of the hazard, and the 
communitys readiness to respond and recover. Available sources of information for hazards include the 
following:  
x The U.S. Geological Survey provides seismic design maps, historical data, and other related 
information and resources [USGS 2015].  
41 
 
Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
x FEMA [FEMA 2015a] provides flood maps and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers provides 
guidance for riverine and coastal flooding [USACE 2015].  
x The National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administrations [NOAA 2015] U.S. Climate 
Resilience Toolkit provides information on many natural hazards. In addition to the listed 
hazards, communities may also need to address weather and climate effects, such as sea level rise 
and drought that also can impact community resilience.  
x The National Weather Service interactive flood map information [NWS 2015] provides historical 
data for inundation and hurricane hazards for each state.  
Hazard levels. For each hazard identified, communities are encouraged to determine three hazard levels 
for planning:  
x Routine  This hazard level is below the design level for the built environment and occurs more 
frequently. This event has a high probability of occurring (on the order of 50 % over a 50-year 
period, as indicated in Table 4-4). At this level, resilient buildings and infrastructure systems 
should remain functional and not experience any significant damage that would disrupt social 
functions in the community. 
x Design  This is the hazard level used in codes and standards for buildings, bridges, and similar 
physical infrastructure systems. Design-level events tend to have a probability of occurring on the 
order of 10 % over a 50-year period for ordinary structures. The design hazard level for a specific 
building or infrastructure component may be greater than that for ordinary buildings, as required 
by its occupancy and risk category classifications in the adopted codes (see Chapter 12, Volume 
II for more information). To support community resilience, buildings and infrastructure systems 
should remain sufficiently functional to support the response and recovery of the community as 
defined by the performance levels identified in Table 4-1 and Table 4-3.  Achievement of desired 
performance levels may require additional design criteria beyond those in codes and standards. 
x Extreme  This hazard level exceeds the design level for the built environment. (Seismic ground 
motion hazards refer to the maximum considered event, which has a probabilistic basis that is 
supplemented with historical data). Extreme events have a small probability of occurrence, on the 
order of 2 % to 3 % over a 50-year period. The extreme hazard level should include those rare 
hazards that may plausibly impact a community, but may not be the greatest possible hazard a 
community can envision. They also may include anticipated long-term changes in hazards due to 
climate change. Critical facilities and infrastructure systems should remain partially functional at 
this level, with ability to restore functionality when needed to support the response and recovery 
of the community as defined by the performance levels. Other buildings and infrastructure 
systems should perform at a level that protects the occupants, though they may need to be 
rescued. Emergency response plans should be developed for scenarios based on this hazard level. 
x Where hazard levels are not defined by code, the community may establish a scenario or hazard 
level based on available guidance or predicted frequency of occurrence. This case is indicated in 
Table 12-3 (Chapter 12, Volume II) by locally determined.  
Table 4-4 shows hazard levels for buildings and other structures based on American Society of Civil 
Engineers (ASCE) Structural Engineering Institute (SEI) Standard 7-10 [ASCE/SEI 2010]. The defined 
hazards are reported in two ways: as an average interval of occurrence over time (mean recurrence 
interval, MRI) or as the probability the event level occurring in a 50-year time period. The probability of 
occurrence description helps convey the relative likelihood of hazard event occurrence for the same time 
period. 
42 
 
Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
Table 4-4: Hazard levels for buildings and facilities  
Hazard Routine Design Extreme 
Ground Snow 50 year MRI or  300 to 500 year MRI1 or  TBD4 
64% in 50 years 15 to 10% in 50 years 
Rain Locally determined2 Locally determined2 Locally determined2 
Wind  Non-Hurricane 50 year MRI or 700 year MRI or 1,700 year MRI3 or 
64% in 50 years 7% in 50 year 3% in 50 years 
Wind  Hurricane 50 to 100 year MRI or 700 year MRI or 1,700 year MRI3 or 
64 to 39% in 50 years 7% in 50 years 3% in 50 years 
Wind  Tornado Locally determined3 Locally determined3 Locally determined3 
Earthquake4 50 year MRI or 500 year MRI or 2,500 year MRI or 
64% in 50 years 10% in 50 years 2% in 50 years 
Tsunami Locally determined3 Locally determined3 Locally determined3  
Flood Locally determined 100 to 500 year MRI or Locally determined 
39 to 10% in 50 years 
Fire  Wildfire Locally determined4 Locally determined4 Locally determined4 
Fire Urban/Manmade Locally determined4 Locally determined4 Locally determined4 
Blast / Terrorism Locally determined5 Locally determined5 Locally determined5 
1 For the northeast, 1.6 (the Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) factor on snow load) times the 50-year 
ground snow load is equivalent to the 300 to 500 year snow load.  
2 Rain is designed by rainfall intensity of inches per hour or mm/h, as specified by the local code.  
3 Tornado and tsunami loads are not addressed in ASCE 7-10. Tornadoes are presently classified by the EF scale. 
See FEMA 361 [2015b] for tornado EF-scale wind speeds. 
4 Hazards to be determined in conjunction with design professionals based on deterministic scenarios.  
5 Hazards to be determined based on deterministic scenarios. Reference UFC 04-020-01 [DoD 2008] for examples 
of deterministic scenarios. 
Table 4-5 reports the three levels of seismic hazard defined by SPUR for use in San Francisco's resilience 
planning. When there is incomplete information about hazards, scenarios can be used for planning or 
assessment purposes. Note that the expected hazard level, as defined by SPUR, is consistent with the 
design hazard level defined in the Guide. Scenarios are often developed for specific examples of hazard 
events that do not have a probabilistic basis (see Table 4-4) and should be used for more general 
resilience plans.  
43 
 
Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
Table 4-5: SPUR [2009] seismic hazard level definitions 
Earthquakes that are likely to occur routinely. Routine earthquakes are defined as having a 70% 
probability of occurring in 50 years. In general, earthquakes of this size will have magnitudes 
equal to 5.0  5.5, should not cause any noticeable damage, and should only serve as a reminder of 
Routine the inevitable. San Franciscos Department of Building Inspection (DBI) uses this earthquake level 
in their Administrative Bulletin AB 083 [San Francisco Building Code 2014] for purposes of 
defining the service level performance of tall buildings. 
An earthquake that can reasonably be expected to occur once during the useful life of a 
structure or system. It is defined as having a 10% probability of occurrence in 50 years. San 
Expected Franciscos Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety (CAPSS) [ATC 2010] assumed that a 
magnitude 7.2 earthquake located on the peninsula segment of the San Andreas Fault would 
produce this level of shaking in most of the city. 
Extreme  The extreme earthquake that can reasonably be expected to occur on a nearby fault. It is defined 
(Maximum  as having a 2% probability of occurrence in 50 years. The CAPSS defined magnitude 7.9 
Considered earthquake located on the peninsula segment of the San Andreas Fault would produce this level of 
Earthquake) shaking in most of the city. 
Hazard Impact. The concept of hazard impact is intended to capture the consequences of an event for a 
given hazard level. The same hazard level may result in varying consequences, depending on the 
disruption and damage to the built environment. Two measures are used to address the consequences of 
the event: the size of the affected area and the level of disruption to community functions. For example, a 
wildfire in wilderness areas, where there is little population, can burn many square miles of forest with 
little disruption. On the other hand, the 1991 Oakland Hills firestorm burned 1500 acres, 25 lives were 
lost, and 150 people were injured. The fire destroyed nearly 3400 structures and caused $1.5 billion in 
damage [USFA 1991]. The affected area was relatively small compared to other wildfires; but the 
disruption to the affected population and built environment was severe.  
To assist communities in determining the anticipated performance of buildings and infrastructure systems 
(see Section 4.1.4), Table 4-6 defines categories for the size of the affected area and anticipated disruption 
level. Estimating the impact for a potential hazard event will help the community to determine anticipated 
performance levels and the extent of mutual aid that they may need.  
Table 4-7 shows examples of hazard impacts of past events. Even though the DaVinci Fire (Los Angeles, 
2014) became an uncontrolled (extreme) building fire that destroyed the apartment complex under 
construction [Rocha 2015], the impact on the community was localized. Similarly, the EF5 tornadoes 
(extreme) that struck Moore, OK [Kuligowski et al 2013] only affected a paortion of the city and did not 
cause disruption to the entire community. In fact, unaffected Moore businesses were able to assist in the 
recovery. However, the same hazard event may cause varying levels of damage and disruption in 
communities. The Loma Prieta earthquake (California, 1989) caused regional damage and disruptions 
near Watsonville [Nakata et al 1999], but moderate community level damage and disruption to San 
Francisco. A hazard event may have sequential hazards, such as winds followed by storm surge during 
Hurricane Sandy in 2012 [FEMA 2013]. A number of New Jersey communities first lost power when 
winds came onshore (routine level, less than design wind speeds) and power distribution lines were 
damaged. When the storm surge subsequently came onshore (design event of 100- to 200-year flood 
elevation), a smaller set of communities were inundated but many functions were severely disrupted in 
these areas. 
44 
 
Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
Table 4-6: Affected area and anticipated community disruption level 
 Category Definition 
Damage and lost functionality is contained within an isolated area of the community. While 
the Emergency Operations Center (EOC) may open, it is able to organize needed actions 
Localized 
within a few days and allow the community to return to normal operations and manages 
recovery. Economic impacts are localized. 
 
reaSignificant damage and loss of functionality is contained within the community, such that 
Aassistance is required from neighboring areas that were not affected. The EOC opens, 
Community 
directs the response and turns recovery over to usual processes once the City governance 
structure takes over. Economic impacts extend to the region or state. 
Affected 
Significant damage occurs beyond community boundaries. Area needing emergency 
response and recovery assistance covers multiple communities in a region, each activating 
Regional 
their respective EOCs and seeking assistance in response and recovery from outside the 
region. Economic impacts may extend national and globally. 
All required response and recovery assistance is handled within the normal operating 
procedures of the affected community agencies, departments, and local businesses with 
 Minor little to no disruption to the normal flow of living. Critical facilities and emergency housing 
are functional and community infrastructure systems are functional with local minor 
damage. 
Community EOC activates and all response and recovery assistance is orchestrated locally, 
Moderate primarily using local resources. Critical facilities and emergency housing are functional and 
community infrastructure systems are partially functional. 
Response and recovery efforts are beyond the authority and capability of local communities 
that are affected and outside coordination is needed to meet the needs of the multiple 
jurisdictions affected. Professional services and physical resources are needed from outside 
Anticipated Disruption LevelSevere 
of the region. Critical facilities and emergency housing may have moderate damage but can 
be occupied with repairs; community infrastructure systems are not functional for most 
needs.  
Table 4-7: Examples of hazard impacts 
Event Community Year Level Affected Area Disruption Level 
DaVinci Apartment Fire Los Angeles 2014 Extreme Localized Minor 
Moore OK Tornado Moore 2013 Extreme Localized Moderate 
Loma Prieta EQ Watsonville 1989 Design Regional  Severe 
Loma Prieta EQ San Francisco 1989 Design Community Moderate 
Hurricane Sandy (wind event) New Jersey 2012 Routine Regional Moderate 
Hurricane Sandy (storm surge event) New Jersey 2012 Design Regional Severe 
45 
 
Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
4.1.4. Determine Anticipated Performance  
The anticipated or likely performance of the designated clusters of existing buildings and infrastructure 
systems also needs to be estimated. Anticipated performance depends on (1) the likely level of damage 
that occurs during the hazard event (performance level) and (2) the corresponding recovery time to restore 
full functionality. The recovery time depends on the performance: a cluster may need limited repairs or 
perhaps replacement. This information, when compared with the performance goals previously set, 
defines the gaps that need to be addressed and informs pre-event planning for post-event response.  
The majority of buildings and infrastructure systems in service today were designed to serve their 
intended functions on a daily basis under the normal environmental conditions. In addition, buildings and 
other structures are designed to provide occupant safety during a design-level hazard event, but they may 
not continue to be functional. Design and construction of buildings and physical infrastructure systems 
are performed by builders, architects and engineers following their community codes and standards of 
practice.  
Codes and standards are continually evolving due to changing technology, changing needs, and new 
information, which sometimes comes from observed performance deficiencies during past events. Much 
of the existing built environment may not meet the long-term performance goals set by communities. 
Temporary or interim solutions can address short-term needs while long-term, permanent solutions are set 
in place.  
Assessment of the existing built environment should consider the performance expectations for adopted 
design codes. Since community resilience focuses on performance at the community level, selected 
building clusters and infrastructure systems are evaluated against the desired performance goals and 
functions based on social needs. Current engineering practice for predicting the performance of buildings 
and infrastructure systems under specific hazard events often is based on expert judgment or past 
experience of other communities. These techniques are constantly being developed and improved, and  
Chapters 12 through 16 (Volume II) provide available guidance on how to estimate the performance of 
existing buildings and infrastructure systems.  
Lack of personal experience with a damaging hazard event, and lack of understanding about the level of 
damage expected when a significant hazard event occurs, can lead to misconceptions about a 
communitys vulnerability. Communities can gain better insights into their vulnerabilities based on 
national experience, not just local events, and can better address those vulnerabilities by adopting and 
enforcing land use guidelines and national model building codes. The cost of compliance for new 
construction is often minimal compared to the cost of recovery and reconstruction.  
4.1.5. Summarize the Results  
The planning team should document desired performance goals and anticipated performance for the built 
environment to improve communication among stakeholders and to support a comprehensive, high-level 
summary of the integrated performance of a communitys buildings and infrastructure systems. To 
support the documentation, a tabular presentation of the many facets of a community resilience plan is 
provided in this Guide. It includes a detailed resilience table for each of the building clusters and 
infrastructure systems as well as summary resilience table that provides an integrated community-level 
overview. The detailed table includes a format for entering the desired performance goals for all clusters 
and subsystems defined for the community for each hazard level, as well as the anticipated performance 
levels for the hazard(s) under consideration. The summary tables combine all of this information together 
for buildings and infrastructure systems. Example tables are included in Chapters 12 to 16 (Volume II). 
The community resilience planning example (Chapter 9) for a fictitious community demonstrates how to 
use the 6-step process and how to complete the resilience tables. 
46 
 
Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
4.2. References 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2010) ASCE 7-10: Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
and Other Structures, Second Edition, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural 
Engineering Institute (SEI), Reston, VA. 
Applied Technology Council (ATC 2010) ATC 52-2: Here TodayHere Tomorrow: The Road to 
Earthquake Resilience in San Francisco: A Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety, ATC-52-2, 
Prepared for the San Francisco Department of Building Inspection (DBI) City and County of San 
Francisco under the Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety (CAPSS) Project, Redwood City, CA. 
Department of Defense (DoD 2008) Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC): DoD Security Engineering 
Facilities Planning Manual, UFC 4-020-01, Department of Defense (DoD), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2011) National Disaster Recovery Framework, Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2013) FEMA P-942: Mitigation Assessment Team 
Report: Hurricane Sandy in New Jersey and New York, Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2013b) Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk 
Assessment Guide, Comprehensive Preparedness Guide (CPG) 201, Second Edition, August, Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2015a) Flood Map Service Center, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. https://msc.fema.gov/portal. Viewed October 27, 2017 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2015b) FEMA P-361: Safe Rooms for Tornadoes and 
Hurricanes, Third Edition, Third Edition, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), 
Washington, DC. 
Kuligowski, E.D., L.T. Phan, M.L. Levitan, D.P. Jorgensen (2013) Preliminary Reconnaissance of the 
May 20, 2013, Newcastle-Moore Tornado in Oklahoma, NIST SP 1164, National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, MD, December 3. 
Nakata, J.K. et al (1999) The October 17, 1989, Loma Prieta, California, EarthquakeSelected 
Photographs, Digital Data Series DDS-29, Version 1.2, U.S. Geological Survey, Denver, CO. 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA 2015) US Climate Resilience Toolkit, 
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, Washington, D.C., https://toolkit.climate.gov/. 
National Weather Service (NWS 2015) Interactive Flood Information Map. National Weather Service 
(NWS), National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Silver Spring, MD. 
Rocha, V. (2015) Accelerant sparked Da Vinci fire, officials say, as reward hits $170,000, Los Angeles 
Times, January 21, 2015, 10:57 AM, http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-170000-reward-
accelerant-da-vinci-fire-20150121-story.html. 
San Francisco Building Code (2014) Requirements and Guidelines for the Seismic Design of New Tall 
Buildings using Non-Prescriptive Seismic-Design Procedures, No. AB-083, Administrative Bulletins, San 
Francisco Building Code Department of Building Inspection, 1660 Mission Street, San Francisco, CA. 
San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association (SPUR 2009) The Resilient City: What San 
Francisco Needs from its Seismic Mitigation Policies, San Francisco Planning and Urban Research 
Association (SPUR), San Francisco, CA. 
47 
 
Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives 
 Army Corps of Engineers (USACE 2015) Flood Risk Management Program,  
Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), Alexandria, VA, 
http://www.iwr.usace.army.mil/Contact/ContactUs.aspx. Viewed October 27, 2015.  
 Geological Survey (USGS 2015) Seismic Design Maps & Tools,  Geological 
Survey (USGS), Washington, DC, http://earthquake.usgs.gov/hazards/designmaps/. Viewed October 27, 
2015. 
 Fire Administration (USFA 1991) The East Bay Hills Fire, Oakland-Berkeley, California, 
USFA-TR-060,  Fire Administration (USFA), Technical Report Series, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC, October, http://www.berkeleyside.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/09/tr-060.pdf. 
48 
 
Step 4: Plan Development 
5. Step 4: Plan Development 
The planning team can next evaluate gaps between desired and 
anticipated performance of the built environment, and 
identifying solutions based on information about the community, 
its social dimensions, and the condition of the  built 
environment. Solutions can be based on combinations of 
administrative and construction options, and multiple solutions 
may be proposed. Based on the long-term community goals and 
the most significant or serious gaps in performance, proposed 
solutions can be prioritized and selected. Strategies are then 
developed to identify opportunities and methods to implement 
the solutions as opportunities and funding become available.  
5.1. Evaluate Gaps Between Desired and Anticipated Performance 
The information in the compiled tables provides a record and a visual presentation of the recovery time 
gaps between the desired performance levels of the built environment and the anticipated performance. It 
should be relatively easy to identify those gaps, and to see differences between community expectations 
and the reality of current buildings and infrastructure systems.  
5.2. Identify Potential Solutions to Address Gaps 
With the gaps articulated, potential solutions for the built environment can be identified and evaluated. 
There may be multiple solutions or multiple stages to meet desired performance goals, including solutions 
to meet immediate needs as well as long-term, permanent solutions.  
Both administrative and construction solutions should be considered. Each type can improve 
performance, reduce damage during hazard events, advance efforts to restore functions within desired 
timeframes, and improve overall community resilience.  
Some administrative activities have low implementation costs and can yield significant long-term benefit. 
All communities, large and small, can identify and commit to implementing these kinds of solutions to 
support their needs.  
Sometimes administrative and construction solutions can be combined. When a hazard event occurs, 
buildings and infrastructure systems are intended to provide protection to the occupants from serious 
injury or death. Communities can go a long way to achieving this goal by adopting and enforcing current 
building codes and regulations for new construction and the retrofit of existing buildings, where 
necessary, for public safety or to minimize community impacts. 
Construction projects can add redundancies or robustness to buildings and infrastructure systems. For 
some hazards, such as flooding, the threat can be redirected. Mitigation projects completed prior to 
significant hazard events can support long-term resilience strategies, reduce demands during recovery, 
and speed the overall recovery process. Mitigation projects often are construction projects, but can also be 
administrative in nature. For instance, communities can adopt and enforce codes and standards with local 
amendments that strengthen resilience or develop mutual aid agreements that support streamlined 
recovery processes.  
49 
 
Step 4: Plan Development 
5.2.1. Potential Administrative Solutions 
A community may begin to address performance gaps by considering administrative solutions. The 
following list of suggestions is not intended to be comprehensive, nor is it intended to be prescriptive. 
Each community is unique based on the characteristics and goals described above. Communities may 
have other administrative solutions that will support their resilience goals and strategies.  
1. Organize and maintain a resilience office with designated leadership. Whether full- or part-time, 
this office is responsible for leading development, implementation, and evaluation of community 
resilience strategies, including integration with other community plans, public outreach, 
collaboration with private stakeholders, and updating the plan on a regular basis.  
2. Align and integrate the resilience plan in a comprehensive approach with other community plans 
(e.g., General Plan, Emergency Operations Plan, Business Continuity Management Programs and 
Plans, Land Use Plans, Infrastructure and Transportation Plans, Housing Plans, Economic 
Development Plans, and plans related to the environment). This can be a lengthy collaborative 
process with the responsible agencies or partners, and may require community engagement  but 
this activity may be the difference between success and failure of a community resilience plan.  
3. Align the resilience planning concepts with the FEMA Mitigation Plan [FEMA 2013] and 
prioritize mitigation grant requests with the resilience plan.  
4. Utilize land use planning tools to manage the green infrastructure (natural capital) that supports 
community goals and to set design standards for construction in high hazard zones, such as flood 
plains, coastal areas, areas susceptible to liquefaction, etc.  
5. Develop processes and guidelines for post-event assessments and repairs that will accelerate the 
evaluation process and the designation of buildings that can be used during repair. 
6. Collaborate with adjacent communities to promote common understanding and opportunities for 
mutual aid during response and recovery phases. Develop mutual aid agreements as directed by 
the resilience plan. 
7. Inform all stakeholders by publishing the performance gaps and resilience plans in transparent 
and publicly available methods, including announcements of results and progress.  
8. Collaborate with managers of state- and federally- owned and leased properties to meet 
community resilience regulations or codes, if those community requirements are more stringent. 
9. Develop and conduct education and awareness programs for all stakeholders in the community to 
enhance understanding, preparedness, and opportunities for improving community resilience.  
10. Form a service provider council of public and private infrastructure owners and provide a 
quarterly forum for them to meet and discuss current activities and issues, dependencies, and 
future plans. 
5.2.2. Potential Construction Solutions 
Targeted construction projects aligned with a communitys resilience goals and plans can greatly enhance 
community resilience. The following solutions are suggested for consideration when developing 
resilience plans for significant long-term impacts. Again, each community is unique based on the 
characteristics and goals described above, and each may have its own solutions. Furthermore, each 
community will need to consider the costs and benefits to the public and private sectors as part of the 
decision process. 
50 
 
Step 4: Plan Development 
Existing construction 
1. Identify opportunities for natural resource protection and implementation solutions. This may 
include sediment and erosion control, stream corridor restoration, forest management, 
conservation easements, and wetland restoration and preservation.  
2. Retrofit public buildings to initiate the resilience implementation process in the community. This, 
along with relocating, or reconstructing public facilities may immediately improve the 
communitys ability to recover from a hazard event and may provide an incentive to private 
building owners to do the same.  
3. Develop incentives and financial support to encourage critical buildings to be retrofitted or 
relocated to meet community codes and regulations, and to achieve desired performance and 
community resilience goals.  
4. Implement or augment inspection programs to identify buildings and infrastructure systems that 
need improvements to adequately protect life safety for the prevalent hazards. 
5. Consider the appropriateness of limited mandatory relocation or retrofitting programs for critical 
facilities through local ordinances. Identify and communicate viable funding opportunities. 
New construction 
1. Adopt and enforce the latest national model building codes, standards, and regulations for the 
built environment, and add requirements if needed to support specific community resilience 
goals.  
2. Assure the effectiveness of the building department in enforcing current codes and standards 
during permit evaluation and construction inspections to ensure that the latest processes are being 
followed.  
3. Enhance codes and standards with local ordinances to support resilience plans, stating 
performance goals in a transparent manner.  
5.3. Prioritize Potential Solutions and Develop Implementation Strategy 
Once the gaps are evaluated and prioritized relative to community goals, strategies can be developed to 
mitigate damage and improve recovery of functions across the community. Implementation strategies 
with short-term and long-term solutions should align community goals, address prioritized gaps and 
needs, and be integrated into all other community plans, such as land use planning or economic 
development. This process is compatible with the FEMA Mitigation Plan [FEMA 2013], which many 
communities are using. The Guide can incorporate mitigation planning into the community resilience 
process as part of the planning needed to restore community functionality.  
Resilience strategies should identify opportunities to improve the built environment, or build-back better. 
After a disaster, there is significant pressure to quickly restore the built environment. Without pre-
established strategies and solutions, communities often rebuild to pre-event conditions. With advance 
planning, reconstruction can promote community resilience. Immediately after a major hazard event, 
there is often community support for higher design standards, appropriate land use changes, requirements 
to repair and retrofit to higher resilience levels or the need to relocate facilities.  
51 
 
Step 4: Plan Development 
5.4. References 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2013) Local Mitigation Planning Handbook, March, 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington DC. 
52 
 
Step 5: Plan Preparation, Review, and Approval 
6. Step 5: Plan Preparation, Review, and Approval 
Plan Preparation. Community resilience goals, plans, and 
implementation strategies should be documented with supporting 
information from Planning Steps 1 through 4 (see Table 1-2, page 17).  
Some basic guidance for plan preparation can be found in a publication 
by FEMA [2010]: 
x Keep the language simple and clear by writing in plain 
English.  
x Summarize important information with checklists and visual  
aids, such as maps and flowcharts. 
x Avoid using jargon and minimize the use of acronyms. 
x Provide enough detail to convey an easily understood plan that is actionable.  
The planning team needs to determine an appropriate level of detail for the published plan. The adequacy, 
feasibility, and clarity of the plan should be key criteria for determining the level of detail. The team 
should include documents that help explain the proposed plan and recommended solutions, but avoid 
providing detailed documentation, such as analyses. Additional information can be made available to the 
public upon request. 
Planners should estimate the resources needed to execute the plan, and should indicate its level of 
accuracy  including an explanation of the built-in assumptions. Some solutions may require further 
analysis before accurate estimates can be developed. Although it is not the teams responsibility to 
identify funding sources for implementation at early stages, the need for resources should be 
acknowledged. Possible funding mechanism can be identified, including proposed redirection of funding 
for other planned projects.  
Plan Review. The planning team should develop and implement an outreach strategy to be certain that the 
community at large is aware of and understands the plan, and to increase appreciation of and support for 
the approach. Outreach should be an integral part of the teams operation from its initial launch, and the 
outreach strategy should include various engagement efforts as planning proceeds.  
At a minimum, when the plan nears readiness, the team leaders should consider doing the following: 
x Have the draft plan reviewed by appropriate community government officials and other area 
governments, likely before it is released to the public. Involving these officials in planning and 
keeping them abreast of efforts along the way will improve the plans accuracy and relevance and 
reduce the time required for final review. 
x Make the draft plan available for public review in electronic and print formats in readily 
accessible locations. Posting on public websites is highly recommended.  Accommodation may 
be required for special populations; for example, language issues may need to be addressed so 
that all interested members of the community are able to review the draft and participate in the 
public comment process. The plan should be available in alternate formats, upon request, to 
maintain compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
A number of outreach options are available: 
x Use various social media to announce the draft to the community. 
53 
 
Step 5: Plan Preparation, Review, and Approval 
x Hold one or more public meetings to present and discuss the draft plan with the community; 
encourage and prepare for media attendance at all public meetings. Conducting separate events 
for the news media are an additional consideration. 
x Arrange one or more meetings with individual stakeholder groups whose cooperation will be vital 
for successful implementation of the plan. Some of these meetings may take place, before the 
public review process begins, to ensure the accuracy and relevance of the draft report.  
x Ensure that employees of all government agencies with responsibilities under the plan are aware 
of and informed about the draft plan. 
x Collect public comments and make them available to the community. 
Community meetings, forums, and other forms of outreach can promote understanding about the 
community goals, social needs, existing buildings and infrastructure systems, prevailing hazards, and 
short- and long-term benefits of the proposed solutions and actions. For short- and long-term success, 
transparent public collaboration and support processes are a necessity. 
Changes should be expected during this review process as the larger community weighs in on the 
community resilience plan. It is likely that compromises will need to be made to reflect stakeholders 
varying points of views. Vigorous discussion is often a prerequisite for, and a good indicator of, a plan 
that reflects a diverse community. Healthy engagement at this level and during the plans review may lead 
to a plan of action that garners broad support and the level of commitment necessary for long-term 
success in improving community resilience. 
Plan Approval. Once the community plan for improving resilience is finalized with stakeholder and 
community input, the plan should be adopted formally by the communitys governing body. Formal 
adoption by the community is needed to ensure that the plan will influence local government activities, to 
encourage and lay the foundation for collaborative agreements with private owners and stakeholders, and 
to provide a basis for implementation through local statutes or ordinances. Formal adoption also 
establishes the authority required for changes and modifications to the plan, and is the basis for budget-
related actions that may be required in order to gain access to the necessary resources.  
References 
FEMA (2010) Developing and Maintaining Emergency Operations Plans, Comprehensive Preparedness 
Guide (CPG) 101, Version 2.0, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington, DC  
54 
 
Step 6: Plan Implementation and Maintenance 
7. Step 6: Plan Implementation and Maintenance 
Plan Implementation. Community resilience leaders and staff should 
maintain develop a plan to track and document the implementation of 
adopted strategies and solutions. Implementation also requires 
continued active outreach and communication with the stakeholders 
involved in the plans development and adoption  and with the 
broader community  through a variety of mechanisms.  
With the planning portion of the six-step process complete  for now  
the heavy lifting shifts from the planning team to the government 
offices and private sector organizations responsible for execution that 
will turn the plan into action.  
 
The approved community resilience plan should be incorporated into 
these organizations priorities and related policies, plans, and 
programs. To maintain momentum and continuity and to assure that the plan receives the persistent 
attention that it will need, it is critical that the governing body of the community designate a leader 
responsible for tracking, coordinating, and communicating resilience-related efforts. This can be the 
community resilience leader for the planning team, or the responsibility can shift to another office or 
official. This is an important decision, and one that should ensure that resilience does not become the 
province of an existing government function (e.g., public safety) to the exclusion of other functions. 
Nevertheless, the organizational structure selected is less important than the continuous and visible 
commitment to the community resilience plan, as demonstrated by the most senior leaders of the 
community.  
If the six-step planning process has been followed, the plan will point to prioritized actions to be taken. 
Even so, some additional work may be needed to organize implementation strategies in terms of 
responsibilities, and to coordinate the flow and timing of actions so that there is a clear road map and 
schedule for those charged with implementation. In some cases, communities may decide to tackle the 
easier or less costly recommendations first, including administrative solutions.  In other communities, 
leaders may decide to undertake at least one or more major actions in the built environment to ensure 
continued broad engagement and momentum. The resources available and the timing of budgets may help 
to determine which actions are taken first and those that will be scheduled for a later date.  
The adopted community plan needs to be reviewed on a regular basis, consistent with the communitys 
planning cycles. Progress can be tracked and publically posted. It is also important to report regularly on 
support garnered, challenges encountered, changing conditions, and benefits accrued over time. 
The resilience plan, including the implementation strategy or specific solutions may need to be modified, 
depending on changes in the social, physical, characteristics of the community, unexpected events, or 
improved understanding of the built environment and impact of prevailing hazards. 
Plan Maintenance. Ideally, the community resilience planning team will recommend a process for 
reviewing, evaluating, and revising the plan on a recurring basis. The resilience plan, including the 
implementation strategy or specific solutions, may need to be modified depending on changes in the 
social or physical characteristics of the community, unexpected events, or improved understanding of the 
built environment and the impact of prevailing hazards. These include the availability of innovative 
technological approaches to strengthening the performance of buildings and infrastructure. They also 
include lessons learned during implementation of the plan. 
The initial part of plan maintenance is monitoring progress. A high priority on communicating progress 
and challenges is needed to achieve the following goals:  
55 
 
Step 6: Plan Implementation and Maintenance 
x Help the community to keep its focus on  and support for  implementing the plan, including the 
many stakeholders who participate in or benefit from its implementation. 
x Ensure that the plan is adjusted for new information, insights, and circumstances.  
Plan review and maintenance should occur on a regular basis. Sometimes, however, events or changes 
may occur that precipitate the need to review the plan outside of the regular schedule. 
The following key events are likely triggers for considering a review of the plan [FEMA 2010]: 
x A major incident. 
x A change in operational resources (e.g., policy, personnel, organizational structures, management 
processes, facilities, equipment). 
x A formal update of planning guidance or standards. 
x A change in elected officials. 
x Major hazard-related exercises. 
x A change in the jurisdictions demographics or hazard or threat profile. 
x A change in the acceptability of various risks. 
x The enactment of new or amended laws or ordinances. 
References 
FEMA (2010) Developing and Maintaining Emergency Operations Plans, Comprehensive Preparedness 
Guide (CPG) 101, Version 2.0, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington, DC  
56 
 
Future Directions 
8. Future Directions 
8.1. Feedback on the Guide 
NIST teamed with a broad cross-section of public and private sector stakeholders and experts to develop 
this Guide. A broad network of stakeholders has been engaged through workshops around the country, the 
solicitation of public comments, and direct interactions with community officials and others.  
NIST encourages comments and feedback on the Guide. It will be especially valuable to have 
communities and those with responsibilities for, and expertise with, the built environment to offer 
reactions and recommendations for improvements. Based on responses to the Guide, NIST may revise it 
in the future. To facilitate this process, NIST would welcome answers to the following questions: 
x Is this Guide useful in helping communities to better plan for disaster resilience? If so, in what 
ways is it useful? If not, how is it lacking? 
x Is this Guide leading to improved resilience planning and execution at the community level? 
x How can the Guide be better organized or presented? 
Send comments to resilience@nist.gov. 
8.2. Community Resilience Panel for Buildings and Infrastructure Systems  
NIST is establishing a Community Resilience Panel for Buildings and Infrastructure Systems (Panel). The 
Panel is a forum to achieve broad stakeholder collaboration and consensus around goals and actions 
needed to achieve community resilience and to derive benefits from that improved resilience. The Panel 
will carry out its mission through a number of activities: 
x Engaging and connecting community and cross-sector stakeholders by creating a process to 
encourage and support community resilience that focuses on buildings and infrastructure. 
x Identifying policy and standards-related gaps and impediments to community resilience planning 
and execution. 
x Raising awareness of sector dependencies and cascading effects of disasters. 
x Identifying or developing consistent resilience definitions and metrics for use across sectors. 
x Contributing to current and future resilience guidance documents (including the Guide). 
x Reducing barriers to achieving community resilience. 
x Developing and maintaining a Resilience Knowledge Base (RKB), a web-based repository for 
documents, data, tools, etc. 
The Panel is engaging stakeholder interests that include, but are not limited to, community planning, 
disaster recovery, emergency management, business continuity, insurance/re-insurance, state and local 
government, standards and code development, and the design, construction, and maintenance of buildings 
and infrastructure systems (water and wastewater, energy, communications, transportation).  
More information is available at: www.CRPanel.org. 
57 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
9. Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
This example uses a fictional community, called Riverbend, USA, to walk through the six-step process 
presented in the Guide. Riverbend is not intended to capture all possible aspects or complexities of 
community functions or the built environment. Rather, it is intended to help users of the Guide better 
understand aspects of the planning process, and assist them in applying the Guide in their own 
communities. The solutions used in Riverbend may or may not be appropriate for other communities. 
NIST encourages each community to determine its own path forward to improve community resilience.  
9.1. Introduction 
Riverbend is a community with a population of approximately 50,000. It is situated in a valley along the 
Central River that was settled by farmers and loggers over 160 years ago because of the areas fertile 
farmland and abundant timber resources. The Riverbend economy is driven by agriculture, 
manufacturing, finance, and real estate development. It is a typical middle-class city with a median 
household income close to the national average. Over the past few years, the logging and mining 
industries have experienced a downturn. Nevertheless, the city has been successful in transforming its 
economy by attracting employers to its other growing economic sectors.  
Ms. Smith grew up in Riverbend and returned to live there after her community of Rockyside suffered the 
devastating impact of a flood. Ms. Smith was a former city council member in Rockyside, and was 
subsequently elected to the Riverbend City Council one year later.  
Deeply affected by the flood she experienced in Rockyside, Ms. Smith advocated for development of a 
plan to make Riverbend more resilient. In making her case to the Mayor and other community leaders, 
she noted that Riverbend had hazard risks similar to Rockyside and warned a similar event could happen 
in Riverbend. Ms. Smith completed some research and believed the new NIST Guide contained a 
methodology flexible enough for her community, and that Rockyside might have fared better if it had 
planned and implemented resilience plans. After several lengthy discussions with other City Council 
members, the Mayor asked Ms. Smith to call and lead a City Hall meeting to engage the community. The 
goal of the meeting was to gauge and build support for developing a community resilience plan.  
At the City Hall meeting, a majority of those who attended supported developing a plan to make 
Riverbends buildings and infrastructure systems more resilient. Several community groups were 
concerned at first that there would be many difficult challenges in developing a plan, and were 
particularly worried about the cost to support such an initiative. However, after additional discussion 
about the importance of resilience in their community, residents saw the benefits of living and working in 
a more resilient community and Riverbend moved forward with developing a resilience plan. Many 
participants at the meeting wanted to be included in the process and offered help. As a result of the 
support at the meeting, Ms. Smith was appointed by the Mayor to lead formation of a planning team and 
follow through with the methodology presented in the Guide. With approval of the City Council and 
support of the community, Ms. Smith began with Step 1. 
58 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
9.2. Step 1: Form a Collaborative Planning Team (Chapter 2) 
Achieving community resilience requires a broad base of support from 
stakeholders. As Riverbend would likely need assistance from neighboring 
communities, regions, and the state, Ms. Smith recognized that she needed to 
identify and engage public and private stakeholders within the community, as 
well as from Fallsborough, the city across the river. Ms. Smith established a 
large work group representing a broad cross section of Riverbend. She made 
sure to include those who could help define social needs. Her vision for the 
organization of the planning process included a planning team overseen by the  
city council, and seven task groups, as shown in Figure 9-1. 
 
Figure 9-1: Riverbend, USA planning team and stakeholder task groups 
The planning team was responsible for leading development of the resilience plan. The team reported to 
the City Council, which oversaw the process and would approve the final resilience plan. An important 
part of the planning teams responsibility was coordinating the task groups. A representative from each 
task group was included on the planning team to coordinate between the groups and to address 
dependencies among buildings and infrastructure systems. The responsibilities of the task groups were 
articulated as follows:  
x Hazards Task Group  Identify potential hazards and appropriate scenarios so the buildings and 
infrastructure systems task groups can determine the anticipated performance of the built 
environment. 
x Social Dimensions Task Group Determine the social needs and priorities of the community and 
determine the time after a hazard event when these needs must be met. Table 9-2 lists the 
representatives of the social dimensions task group by social institution.  
x Buildings Task Group Identify and classify the buildings within Riverbend into one of the four 
building clusters described in the Guide (i.e., critical facilities, emergency housing, 
housing/neighborhoods, community recovery) based on how they meet the communitys response 
and recovery needs.  
x Transportation Task Group Identify and characterize the transportation systems within the city 
boundary and the transportation network at the state and regional level, and how these systems 
meet response and recovery needs.  
59 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  regional fire and rescue
 
ality agency
 
  
 
Hazard Task Groupazard specialist(s)
 ounty Departments of Transportation
c
Transportation Task Group
Volume I
  
-
Water and Wastewater Task Group
 State geological survey Riverbend Department of Community DevelopmentUniversity hFlood plain managerU.S. Army Corps of EngineersDepartment of Environmental ProtectionState and Engineer from Riverbend Department of Public WorksRailroad representativesEmergency management representatives Traffic engineerBridge engineer Riverbend Department of Public WorksFallsborough water engineerEmergency manager of Environmental qu
                
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
 
  
  
 
 
Riverbend, USA
  
 
 
  
information 
  60
 
 public 
 
  
 
 
Planning Team 
  firms
 munications Task Group
government leaders and community stakeholders Buildings Task Group
 ead (Ms. Smith)
l 
  
Com
anager
ngineer
, USAme
ty planner
Resilience City City Public works representativeCiRiverbend Office of Emergency ManagementBuildings departmentFinance representativeCommunity outreach/ Representative from each task group Building owners Critical facility managers (hospitals, schools)Privately owned building stock representative(s)Local industry facility managersGeneral contractorReal estate representativesEngineersDevelopersConstructionFire departmentLand developersState PUCTelecommunication service providersRiverbend Office of Emergency Management 
                        
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Community Resilience Planning Example : Riverbend 
1
-
9
  
social 
 
Table 
 
  
tives by  
mission (PUC)
 
 
 
City Council
for representa
 
2
-Energy Task Group
9 
 
 Social Dimensions Task Group 
commissioners
Table 
nstitution.
MayorFour AuditorSee iRegional generation representativesDistribution system provider (load serving entity)Electric power engineerRiverbend Office of Emergency ManagementLiquid fuel distributorState Public Utility ComState Department of Energy
           
xxxxxxxxxxx
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-2: Social Dimensions Task Group by social institution 
Family and Kinship Economic Government Health 
x Neighborhood x City Chamber of x Police and fire/EMS x Local health 
representatives  Commerce  department 
x City Department of 
x Citizens groups x Retail managers Parks and Recreation x Hospitals 
x Gas station managers x Senior living center x Urgent care/health 
offices 
x Banking and finance x Aging and people with 
sector disabilities services x Behavioral health 
care providers 
x Local major industries x Courts 
Community Service 
Education Religious and Cultural Media 
Organizations  
x Public schools x Shelter/food bank x Local religious, cultural, x Local media outlets 
representatives or belief groups 
x Private schools 
x American Red Cross  
x Community college / 
higher education x Recreational/civic 
clubs or groups 
x Energy Task Group Identify and characterize infrastructure systems for electric power, natural 
gas, and liquid fuel systems, and for a hydroelectric dam, and their role in supporting response 
and recovery needs. 
x Communications Task Group Identify and characterize communication systems, including 
wireline, cellular, broadcast, and cable systems, and their role in supporting response and 
recovery needs. Additional responsibilities included coordinating with emergency response 
agencies to support emergency communication needs. 
x Water and Wastewater Task Group Identify and characterize water and wastewater 
infrastructure systems, and their role supporting response and recovery needs. Additional 
responsibilities included coordinating with the public health authority, environmental quality 
agency, firefighters, hospitals, and others to meet community needs. 
The task groups largely worked in parallel, and at times jointly, with oversight from the planning team 
throughout the planning process. To promote team member participation, particularly for members 
outside the local community, face-to-face meetings were supplemented with virtual meeting capability 
(e.g., teleconference, webinar, and video conference). 
9.3. Step 2: Understand the Situation (Chapter 3) 
Once the planning team and task groups were created, the next step was to characterize both the social 
and built environments. The planning team assigned the social dimensions task group to characterize the 
social environment in a report. Similarly, the planning team asked each of the building and infrastructure 
system task groups to characterize their portion of the built environment. The hazards group was tasked to 
complete a report on the potential hazards that Riverbend might face. These reports were completed in 
parallel, using the guidance in the NIST Guide. The planning team, with representatives of each task 
group, then worked together to determine the links between the social and built environments. The 
61 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
following sections summarize the reports of the task groups, except for the hazards task group, which is 
addressed in Step 3. 
9.3.1. Identify and Characterize the Social Dimensions (Section 3.1) 
Riverbend is a typical middle-class city with an economy (Table 9-3) 
consisting of trade, government, manufacturing, education and health 
services, finance and business services, hospitality, and construction. 
One of the largest single employers is the National Aircraft Parts 
(NAP) factory. NAP manufactures aircraft parts for the region and 
employs over 3,000 people, many of whom live in Riverbend. NAP 
is also the sole supplier of several equipment components critical to 
the U.S. military. Approximately 40 % of the communitys 
workforce is employed by small businesses. As the mining and  
logging industries have declined, Riverbend has successfully 
transformed its economy by attracting employers to its growing professional and business services, health 
services, and transportation sectors. 
According to the 2010  Census, the 
median household income is slightly above the U.S. Table 9-3: Employment for Riverbend, USA 
national average at $52,612 (see Table 9-4). Almost 
20 % of the population, 25 years and older, have a Industry Percentage 
four-year degree or higher. Statistics show the 
diversity in age of the city, with 40 % of the Trade, transportation, and utilities 22 
population under the age of 18, and 13 % of the 
population 65 years of age or older. Additionally, Government 18 
approximately 15 % of the population in Riverbend 
has a disability (includes those needing aid for Manufacturing 17 
mobility or access), as defined by the U.S. Census 
Bureau. Education and health services 13 
The rate of emigration is low in Riverbend. A Professional and business services 8 
majority (59 %) of the housing units are owner 
occupied and the homeowner vacancy rate is low Leisure and hospitality 8 
(2.6 %). Additionally, according to a demographic 
study conducted by the state university two years Construction 5 
ago, the population of Riverbend is increasing and 
is expected to grow steadily over the next three Financial activities 4 
decades. 
Other services 3 
Riverbend is governed by its City Council, which 
includes the Mayor, four Commissioners, and an Mining and logging 1 
auditor (see Table 9-1, page 60). The city's Office 
of Neighborhood Services provides a liaison Information 1 
between the city government and Riverbend's  
neighborhood associations. Riverbend has an active 
parks and recreation department that maintains widely-used bike paths, local parks, and walking/hiking 
trails. Additionally, there is a popular senior center and several golf courses located in the area.  
The city is served by Central Regional Fire and Rescue, a special purpose district providing firefighting 
and emergency services. Because Riverbend is so close to the Central River, two of the four fire stations 
within Central Regional Fire and Rescue have water rescue capabilities. Additionally, there is a close 
62 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
relationship between the Central Regional Fire and Rescue and the Riverbend Department of Public 
Works. The police department has over 80 staff members, a third of whom are civilian, to provide 
services. 
Riverbends health system offers a 
variety of health services, including Table 9-4: Riverbend, USA population demographics 
mental health services. The county 
department of health is located Demographic Values 
within the city limits. Additionally, 
Memorial Hospital provides a 76-bed Household income under $35,000 32% 
facility, with over 130 health care 
providers on staff. There also are two Household income over $100,000 13% 
urgent care facilities and a local non-
profit healthcare provider in the city. Median household income $52,612 
Riverbend is served by a public Households from different state within last 5 years 11% 
school district and a few private 
schools. There are a total of 23 K-12 Population (25 +) with four year degree or higher 18.4% 
public schools within the school 
district, serving approximately 9000 Population (25+) with graduate degree 6.1% 
students. A two-year community 
college, which serves over 12,000 Ratio of Transfer Payments* to Earned Income 18% 
students, is located on the north edge 
of the downtown area.  Households receiving Food Stamp/SNAP benefits 15% 
Riverbend offers several programs to Unemployment rate 5.5% 
provide social support to those in 
need. Two food banks serve Population below 18 years 40% 
approximately 10,000 people each 
year from around the region. The city Population 65 years of age or above 13% 
also has a homeless shelter that 
provides food, shelter, clothing, Population with disabilities 15% 
counseling and mental health 
referrals to over 100 homeless people Employed population, uninsured  82% 
each day. 
Riverbend has local print and radio Unemployed population uninsured 63% 
media. The city relies on nearby 
Fallsborough for local television Gender (female) 51% 
news. 
*Social security and public assistance 
Overall, the residents of Riverbend  
have a good quality of life. A healthy percentage are employed either inside or outside the community. 
There is limited public transportation available, but most households have at least one vehicle, with 90 % 
relying on personal transportation (including carpool) to commute to and from work. Historically, the 
unemployment rate has been close to the national average. Riverbend has very active government and 
community groups. Many neighborhoods have citizen watch groups, and they have become involved in 
safety-related city government decisions.  
Once the social dimensions task group characterized the social environment, they worked to identify the 
dependencies among and within Riverbends social institutions. Following the Guides methodology, the 
task group recognized that a disruption in the built environment that affects one social institution is likely 
to affect others. Using the templates provided in Chapter 10, Volume II of the Guide (Tables 10-3 and 10-
4), the group identified ways in which the social institutions in Riverbend depend on each other, and 
63 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
identified each institutions internal dependencies. For example, the residents rely on businesses, including 
National Aircraft Parts, for employment and services, such as daycare.  
The team also identified an important dependence for the citys services, particularly in the wake of a 
disaster. With severe disruption to services and damage to the built environment, there might be a 
diminished workforce available to perform those services. Immediately after the event, fire and police 
services, emergency medical services, and other emergency operations could be hindered. Longer-term, it 
could affect Riverbends tax base, especially if people left the community.  
Filling out the Guides tables with information specific to Riverbend helped the task group better 
understand these dependenciesinformation they then shared with the rest of the planning team. This 
process helped identify the functions that are most critical during various phases of a hazard event and to 
identify potential vulnerabilities that may result from cascading failures in other infrastructure systems. 
9.3.2. Characterize Built Environment (Section 3.2) 
The buildings and infrastructure systems within and 
surrounding Riverbend were built over a long period of 
time. Roughly one-third of the downtown area lies within 
the 100-year flood plain. Most of the buildings and 
infrastructure in the downtown area were constructed soon 
after the city was founded, and are older than the rest of 
Riverbend. Following a downturn of the logging industry in 
the 1970s, the downtown area declined, and many residents 
moved into other neighborhoods. The city limits expanded,  
and the associated infrastructure to support this geographic growth absorbed much of Riverbends 
resources. Downtown became characterized by lower-income residents and smaller businesses. 
In the past 10 years, an improved economy has made downtown more attractive and there is significant 
reinvestment in the downtown building stock and urban renewal.  
As discussed previously, each of the building and infrastructure system task groups was asked to develop 
a brief report on the status of their portion of the built environment. The following summarizes their key 
findings. 
Buildings. The building stock in Riverbend ranges from unreinforced masonry buildings constructed over 
100 years ago to mobile homes and single unit timber-framed houses built from 1950-1990. There also 
are modern steel mid-rise buildings, mainly for commercial or industrial purposes. A significant number 
of unreinforced masonry buildings remain downtown adjacent to the river. Table 9-5 summarizes 
buildings by occupancy class. The Riverbend task group also grouped buildings by age and state of 
maintenance to better understand their characteristics. 
Transportation. Riverbend is bisected by an interstate freeway. It also includes state, county, and local 
roadways. Although there are other transportation systems in the region, including a regional airport and 
freight rail line, people rely on the roadway system for personal transport and goods are delivered by 
truck. The regional airport is located 48 km (30 miles) away from Riverbend, and has limited commercial 
airline service. 
Only one bridge crosses the Central River. It is a 4-lane interstate bridge that is the primary crossing of 
the Central River in the region, completed in 1955 and widened in 1980. The next crossing of the Central 
River is 16 km (10 miles) north. The bridge also carries the water main from the Fallsborough Water 
Treatment Plant into Riverbend, an important dependency between the transportation and water systems. 
64 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Therefore, failure of this bridge would significantly disrupt water service to the residents and businesses 
of Riverbend.  
Table 9-5: Building occupancy class and building count 
Occupancy Class No. Buildings  Occupancy Class No. Buildings 
Residential  Industrial 
x Single family dwelling 11,131  x Heavy  65 
x Mobile home 1,292  x Light  45 
x Multifamily dwelling 3,073  x Food/drug/chemicals 13 
x Temporary lodging 9  x Metals/minerals processing 4 
x Institutional dormitory 30  x High technology - 
x Nursing home 5  x Construction 147 
Commercial  x Agriculture 38 
x Retail trade 175  x Religion/non-profit 77 
x Wholesale trade 88  x Government  
x Personal and repair services 176   General Service 27 
x Professional/technical services 270   Emergency response 9 
x Banks 18  x Education  
x Hospital 3   Grade schools 30 
x Medical office/clinic 62   College/university 10 
x Entertainment/recreation 122    
x Theaters 5    
x Parking -    
Within the downtown area, many people rely on transit bus service for mobility. Commuter bus service to 
Fallsborough provides transit access for workers. However, personal automobiles are the primary means 
of mobility for the majority of the population, and traffic during peak commute times is a frequent 
complaint for residents.  
Energy. Riverbend Gas and Electric is an investor-owned utility that provides power and natural gas to 
Riverbend. It purchases power from a hydroelectric power plant located in Fallsborough that is 
maintained by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. There are no petroleum refineries in the city. Liquid fuel 
is transported to Riverbend via a liquid fuel pipeline from the neighboring major industrial center. 
Electric power distribution is predominantly through overhead transmission lines with a single crossing of 
the Central River. 
65 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Communications. One national and one regional telecommunication company provide internet, cellular 
and wireline phone, and cable services to residents and businesses in Riverbend. Though these companies 
operate within a competitive environment, they have managed to co-exist and work together. The smaller, 
regional company has similar technology and shares infrastructure with the national company. In fact, the 
smaller regional service provider leases space from the national companys regional Central Office, 
located outside of Riverbend.  
Water and wastewater. Riverbend does not have a water treatment plant. It gets its drinking water from 
Fallsborough, which is a wholesale provider selling treated water to a number of neighboring cities. 
Riverbend relies on County Environmental Services to treat sanitary sewage and storm water. The 
Riverbend Department of Public Works is responsible for designing, constructing, operating, and 
maintaining the city's water and wastewater infrastructure. 
9.3.3. Link Social Dimensions and the Built Environment (Section 3.3) 
Once the task groups characterized the social and built environments, representatives of the task groups 
worked with the planning team to link the social needs and institutions to the built environment. (Note: 
Chapter 10 in Volume II of the Guide provides examples of how to accomplish this goal). This is a key 
step in the process of addressing community resilience because the eight social institutions identified in 
the Guide (i.e., government, education, economics, health, family, media, religious/cultural groups, and 
community service organizations) rely on the built environment to function.  
Following the approach in the Guide, the Riverbend planning team created one table for each 
infrastructure system (transportation, water and wastewater, energy, and communication) and for 
buildings. For each social institution, the table provides the following information:  
1. Purpose of the infrastructure system or buildings 
2. How that purpose is actualized 
3. Direct and indirect consequences for individuals, groups, and the community when hazard events 
lead to degraded functionality 
The Riverbend planning team found that identifying the direct and indirect consequences of a hazard 
event was particularly useful for developing priorities and community performance goals when planning 
for resilience (the next step in the process  see Section 9.4). 
Table 9-6 shows a partially completed table that links the social institutions and transportation systems. 
Although the entire table was completed by the Riverbend planning team, the table presented here 
displays only their highest priorities. Table 9-6 shows that the transportation network of roads, and the 
one interstate bridge, are used to distribute goods for processing, as well as final goods for sale. The 
transportation network of roads and the interstate bridge allows consumers to access goods and services 
and provide a means for the workforce to go to and return from work. The regional airport (located 
outside of the community) is also included in the table, but it only provides limited commercial flights. 
The table also shows how the loss of any of these systems could disrupt the supply chain (i.e., the supply, 
manufacture, and distribution of goods and services) and increase the time commuters would spend on the 
road and their commuting costs. Indirect impacts are also listed in Table 9-6 to capture the potential for 
cascading effects. The team noted that supply chain disruptions could lead to short- and long-term 
business losses, rising prices, reduced competitiveness, and dwindling market share.  
Table 9-7 shows how the Riverbend planning team characterized their social institutions reliance on the 
buildings within their community. Table 9-7 only shows the highest priority links identified by the 
planning team. The table emphasizes the importance of the citys downtown area to the citys economy, 
as well as the importance of the local government to the day-to-day operation and overall safety of the 
city.  
66 
 
term/ 
-
  
 
Indirect
 
Demand for shortnearby shelterLoss of taxes, market sharePrice increases
   
xxx      
 
 
 
 
  
Volume I
 
-cally 
  
 
 
 
Direct
Displaced population (lack of access)Inability to physiconnect with othersLoss of access to raw materialsLoss of employmentIncrease in commuting time and costsConsumers unable to obtain goods and services
Possible Impacts if Transportation Systems Are Damaged      
xxxxxx      
Riverbend, USA
 

  
 
  67
ent
 
Environm
1 Interstate road1 freight rail line1 bridge for vehicular trafficRegional airport
    
How Actualized within Built xxxx
  
  
 
 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example 
from work
: Links between Riverbends social institutions and transportation systems 
6
-
9 
Table 
 
Access to and from housingDistribute goods for processingObtain labor and capitalDistribute intermediate goodsDistribute final goods for saleBring sellers (providers) and consumers togetherGetting to and
Purpose of Transportation 
within each Social Institution
       
xxxxxxx      
 
 
 
   
   
Social Institution
FamilyEconomicGovernmentHealthEducationCommunity Service Religious MediaNote: Only the highest Riverbend priorities are shown in this table. The entire table was completed by the planning team.
ties 
  
 
      
 
 
Indirect
Loss of taxes, market sharePrice increasesIncreased casualand economic damage
   
xxx
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
Volume I 
 
-
      
 
 
 Directrevenuety
 
Possible Impacts if Buildings are Damaged
and buildingsLoss ofLoss of goods and services for saleLoss of ability to manufacture goodsLoss of employmentLoss of incomeLoss of housingLoss of materialsDecrease in social capitalDiminished emergency responseDisruption to government continuiLoss of archived materials
           
xxxxxxxxxxxy the planning team.
Riverbend, USA
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
68
  
       
 
 
 
  
Environment 
 
StoresRestaurantsBankSalon and barbershopInternet cafeHouses and apartments
Citys downtown:       National Aircraft Parts plantOfficesPolice stationsFire and EMS stationsEmergency operations center (EOC)JailCourthouseLibraries
How Actualized within Built 
         
xxxxxxxxx
y Resilience Planning Example 
 
g 
 
: Links between Riverbends social institutions 
7
-
Communit9
 
 
       
Table  
points 
  
 
 
each Social Institution
Point of saleLocation of employment, gatheringPrepare materials for transportStore materialsHouse equipment and machineryDesign and develop aircraft partsProvide work and meetinspace for leaders and staffHouse public safety and emergency response capabilities 
Purpose of Buildings within 
        
xxxxxxxx
 
 
  
   
 
 
Social Institutionommunity Service
FamilyEconomicGovernmentHealth CareEducationCReligious MediaNote: Only the highest Riverbend priorities are shown in this table. The entire table was completed b
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-7 shows that the buildings within the downtown district, from an economic standpoint, primarily 
support three things: 1) goods and services for consumers, 2) housing, and 3) jobs for the community. The 
downtown district consists of small-business retail, restaurants, banks, several salons and barbershops, 
and an internet caf, as well as houses and apartments. The community benefits from a strong economy 
and sales tax. The downtown buildings also provide places for people to gather and socialize, increasing 
the social capital within the community. The loss of the buildings in the downtown area would result in 
loss of employment and income for workers, access to goods and services, revenue for the businesses, and 
housing for the community.  
Table 9-7 also shows that the manufacturing plant facility, i.e., National Aircraft Parts (NAP), serves four 
functions: 1) store materials; 2) house equipment and machinery vital to manufacturing aircraft parts; 3) 
design and develop the parts; and 4) prepare materials for transport. The loss of this facility would result 
in the loss of income and employment for workers, loss of access to goods, loss of materials, and loss of 
revenue for the plant. Without the downtown area or the NAP, Riverbend also would experience 
secondary losses, such as a decrease in tax revenues. 
Among other functions, Riverbends government buildings provide office and meeting spaces for 
community leaders and staff and house public safety and emergency response capabilities (especially 
important during and after a hazard event). Government buildings consist of police stations, fire and 
emergency medical services (EMS) stations, an emergency operations center, mixed office spaces, a jail, 
a courthouse, and a library. The loss of any of these structures could disrupt continuity of government 
services. Damage to critical facilities could lead to diminished emergency response.  
Although the transportation system and buildings were high priority concerns for Riverbend, the planning 
team recognized that dependencies were a key consideration. Buildings would not be functional without 
services from the supporting infrastructure systems: energy, transportation, water and wastewater, and 
communications. That led Riverbend planners to think about the dependencies between buildings and 
infrastructure systems, focusing on the continued functionality of critical downtown buildings that could 
have major impacts on public safety and the economy if they were damaged badly. 
As they considered dependencies and social needs, the planning team worked with the task groups to 
identify the building clusters and supporting infrastructure systems. Table 9-8 shows the building clusters 
identified by the Riverbend planning team: Critical Facilities; Emergency Housing; 
Housing/Neighborhood/Business; and Community Recovery. That table also shows some specific 
buildings that were included in the building clusters. Since interruptions to the NAP factorys operations 
could be costly to the local and regional economies and impact the nations military readiness, the 
planning team decided to categorize NAP as part of the Critical Facilities cluster.  
69 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-8: Riverbend, USA building clusters grouped by functional category and recovery phases 
Building Clusters 
Critical Facilities (Short-Term) Housing/Neighborhoods/Business (Intermediate) 
1. Police and fire/EMS stations 1. Waste management facilities 
2. Emergency operations centers 2. Schools 
3. Memorial hospital and urgent care facilities, 3. Medical provider offices 
including pharmacies 
4. Downtown district 
4. Disaster debris and recycling centers 
5. Local businesses outside of the downtown area 
5. National Aircraft Parts (NAP) Factory 
6. Daycare centers  
7. Religious/cultural centers/facilities 
8. Fitness centers 
9. Buildings or space for social services (e.g., child 
services) and prosecution activities 
Emergency Housing (Short-Term) Community Recovery (Long-Term) 
1. Residential shelter-in-place  1. Residential housing  
2. Food distribution centers 2. Commercial and industrial businesses, except National 
Aircraft Parts Factory 
3. Animal shelters 
3. Non-emergency city services 
4. Faith and community-based organizations 
4. Resilient landscape repair, redesign, reconstruction, 
5. Emergency shelter for emergency response and and repairs to domestic environment
recovery workers 
 
6. Gas stations  
7. Banking facilities  
9.4. Step 3: Determine Goals and Objectives (Chapter 4) 
After the planning team worked with the task groups to characterize the 
social and built environments of their community, they were ready to 
move forward in developing their community resilience plan.  
9.4.1. Establish Long-Term Community Goals (Section 4.1.1) 
The resilience plan is most effective if it supports long-term community 
growth and development goals. The planning team and task groups 
worked to identify long-term community goals based on existing  
community plans and input from community agencies and organizations. Three long-term goals and 
metrics were identified for Riverbend: 
70 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
1. Minimal disruptions to daily life and commerce 
 Metric: Average commute time 
2. Stable employment and new, diversified businesses to support economic growth 
 Metrics: Jobs added; tax base value 
3. Improved ability of government services and critical facilities to function after hazard events 
 Metrics: Government services outages (number); disaster response drill performance; 
emergency response time 
9.4.2. Establish Desired Performance Goals for the Built Environment (Section 4.1.2) 
The planning team reviewed the links between the social and built environments to understand how 
building and infrastructure systems supported their social needs and institutions. Desired performance 
goals for buildings and infrastructure systems were determined independently from the type of hazard 
faced by the community. The desired performance goals were set to support community services before 
and after hazard events, including the sequence of services needed after an event.  
The following high-level performance goals were set for each hazard level (routine, design, and extreme): 
1. For routine events: 
 Meet community social needs within 1-3 days of the hazard event  
 Buildings and infrastructure systems should be fully functional within 3 days of the hazard 
event 
2. For design events: 
 Meet critical social needs within 1 week and community social needs within 1-12 weeks  
 Complete reconstruction projects within two years of the event 
3. For extreme events: 
 Preserve critical facilities, including key industry (e.g., NAP, see Table 9-8 for other critical 
facilities) 
 Meet critical social needs within 12 weeks  
 Complete reconstruction within 3- 4 years.  
The planning team then worked with the building and infrastructure task groups to develop performance 
goals for building clusters and infrastructure systems to meet these high-level goals, using the tables in 
Chapters 12 to 16 (Volume II) of the Guide. Table 9-9 summarizes the tables presented in this example. 
However, only the design level event is discussed in detail for the sake of brevity.  
The Riverbend planning team used the functionality levels for building clusters in Table 4-3 on page 40 
(30 %, 60 %, and 90 %) to indicate the recovery sequencing expected to reach their desired performance 
goals: 
x 30 % represents the fraction of buildings within a cluster or portion of infrastructure systems that 
need to be functional to initiate recovery activities 
x 60 % represents the fraction needed for usual (i.e., daily) operations to resume at a reduced scale 
x 90 % represents the fraction needed to declare the building cluster or infrastructure system at 
normal operating capacity. 
71 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
(Note: The performance goals are tailored for a number of buildings or infrastructure system 
components, such as bridges. In Riverbend, the simple examples of a single bridge focuses more directly 
on services provided, rather than the number of bridges able to provide service.) 
Table 9-9: Summary of resilience tables for routine, design, and extreme events  
Hazard Routine Hazard  Design Hazard  Extreme Hazard  
Building Table 9-18, page 88 Table 9-11, page 76 Table 9-25, page 95 
Transportation Table 9-19, page 89 Table 9-12, page 77 Table 9-26, page 96 
Energy Table 9-20, page 90 Table 9-13, page 78 Table 9-27, page 97 
Water Table 9-21, page 91 Table 9-14, page 79 Table 9-28, page 98 
Waste Water Table 9-22, page 92 Table 9-15, page 80 Table 9-29, page 99 
Communications Table 9-23, page 93 Table 9-16, page 81 Table 9-30, page 100 
Summary Table 9-24, page 94 Table 9-17, page 82 Table 9-31, page 101 
The following summaries briefly describe the key considerations taken into account by the planning team 
and task groups when they completed the performance goals tables for the design hazard event (Table 
9-11 to Table 9-16 document the desired performance goals and anticipated performance for the design 
hazards): 
Buildings (Chapter 12, Volume II). The planning team felt that critical facilities should experience little 
interruption or damage in a design hazard event (see Table 9-11) since these facilities were needed to 
support recovery and emergency services to the rest of the community. The NAP factory was also 
considered a critical facility due to its high level of employment and importance to the nations defense 
needs. Therefore, it was important that this facility experience minimal interruption in a design hazard 
event. The Emergency Housing cluster would need to perform well so it could be used in the days and 
weeks following a design hazard event. The planning team made this decision because they felt that the 
performance goals for the Housing and Community Recovery building clusters could be made less 
stringent if emergency housing was available. They also decided it was unreasonable to set high 
performance goals for certain buildings (e.g., unreinforced masonry) due to inherent limitations of this 
construction type.  
Transportation (Chapter 13, Volume II). The planning team found that many of the example 
transportation system components in the Guide performance goals table (see Chapter 13 in Volume II) did 
not apply to their community. Therefore, they only included the appropriate components in the 
performance goals table completed for Riverbend (see Table 9-12). 
As previously discussed, the four-lane interstate bridge over the Central River is a major concern for the 
community because it is the only crossing that carried traffic and supports a water pipeline into Riverbend 
from Fallsborough. As seen in Table 9-12, after engaging with the State Department of Transportation, 
the planning team decided the bridge would be inspected for structural damage the day of the hazard 
event to ensure it was safe for emergency vehicles. If declared structurally sound, the bridge would be 
reopened with one lane in each direction (this meets the nominal 60 % functionality criterion), while the 
exterior two lanes would remain closed to permit a detailed inspection of damage to the fascia and soffit 
of the bridge. All lanes would then be open, hopefully by the day following the hazard event, making the 
72 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
bridge fully operational (meeting the nominal 90 % functionality criterion). Although the regional airport 
was not within the community, the planning team worked with representatives from the airport to 
understand the impact a design event could have on its functionality so Riverbend would know how 
disruptions might affect their businesses.  
Riverbend is served primarily by local roads. The team set goals for local roads to critical building 
clusters to be fully operational within 1 to 3 days, including debris removal, if necessary.  
Energy (Chapter 14, Volume II). Similar to the transportation table, the planning team used the relevant 
rows in the energy performance goals table in Chapter 14. Riverbends energy is generated solely by a 
hydroelectric power plant. Interruption to this facility would shut down the power system, which could in 
turn cause critical facilities within the city to become non-functional after their standby power is 
expended. As they collaborated, Riverbend planners were told by operators that the power plant was 
designed to continue functioning in a design event, and that was a reasonable goal.  
For power infrastructure serving critical facilities, the team set a goal of being able to continue operations 
during or immediately after the hazard event and operate at full capacity the next day (see Table 9-13). In 
general, the restoration of the transmission and distribution infrastructure needed to be restored to 
building clusters within 1 to 3 days. 
Communications (Chapter 15, Volume II). The planning team recognized that working with local 
service providers was essential to setting realistic performance goals for communications infrastructure. 
The regional and national telecommunications companies that served Riverbend work together in many 
ways. They share a regional Central Office and exchange nodes. The service providers told the 
community planners they thought it was reasonable to assume that these nodes would perform well in a 
design hazard event because of the recent construction and quality of the facilities.  
The communication service providers worked with the resilience team planners to understand community 
priorities and desired performance goals. In terms of the last mile (i.e., distribution system), the 
performance goal of little or no disruption to critical facilities such as hospitals, fire stations, and the 
emergency operations center (EOC) was set (see Table 9-16) to facilitate emergency services and 
recovery of function. The service providers understood the performance goals, but stated it would take 1 
to 4 weeks (typically 1 week) to restore full functionality to communications infrastructure serving other 
building clusters. The community agreed that this was reasonable.  
Water (Chapter 16, Volume II). With only one water main crossing the river from Fallsborough to 
Riverbend, water supply is a major concern. Critical facilities need a water supply within 1 to 3 days to 
remain fully functional. In addition to potable water, facilities also need an adequate water supply for fires 
sprinklers if they are occupied. The team concluded that housing and businesses could do without potable 
water for up to one week (indicated as by the 90 % in Table 9-14). Temporary water supplies brought into 
the community would serve as a stopgap measure until then. 
Wastewater (Chapter 16, Volume II). It was important that the wastewater infrastructure system not 
pollute the river with raw sewage, and that backups and overflows did not impact the community. The 
planning team set a goal of one week for the wastewater treatment plant to be operating with primary 
treatment and disinfection (indicated as 1 to 4 weeks in Table 9-15). However, they realized that meeting 
all regulatory requirements may take some time after a design event, and therefore set a goal of meeting 
those requirements in 6 months (shown as 4-36 months in Table 9-15). That would result in violations of 
those requirements, a consequence the team was prepared to accept. 
9.4.3. Define Community Hazards and Hazard Levels (Section 4.1.3) 
Identifying the communitys prevailing hazards was the next step. Working in parallel with the other 
groups, the hazards task group reviewed existing hazard maps and historical events that had struck 
73 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Riverbend. Earthquakes and flooding were the main hazards that affected Riverbend (Table 9-10). 
Seismic hazards typically have a lower probability of occurrence (or longer mean recurrence interval, 
MRI) for the same 50 year period due to their sudden, unpredictable occurrence, and lack of warning 
time. 
Table 9-10: Hazards considered by Riverbend, USA 
Hazard Routine Design Extreme 
50 year MRI or 500 year MRI or 2,500 year MRI or 
Earthquake 64% in 50 years 10% in 50 years 2% in 50 years 
50-year MRI or 100-year MRI or 500-year MRI or 
Flooding 64% in 50 years 39% in 50 years 10% in 50 years 
Three levels were identified for each hazard: a routine event, a design event, and an extreme event. 
Section 4.1.3 defines the three hazard levels as follows:  
x Routine  Hazard level is below the design level for the built environment and occurs more 
frequently. This event has a high probability of occurring (on the order of 40 % to 60 % over a 
50-year period, as indicated in Table 4-4). At this level, resilient buildings and infrastructure 
systems should remain functional and not experience any significant damage that would disrupt 
social functions in the community. 
x Design  This is the hazard level used in codes and standards for buildings, bridges, and similar 
physical infrastructure systems. Design-level events tend to have a probability of occurring on the 
order of 10 % over a 50-year period for ordinary structures (e.g., see risk category II, Section 
12.2, Volume II). The design hazard level for a specific building or infrastructure component may 
be greater than that for ordinary buildings, as required by its classification in the adopted codes. 
Buildings and infrastructure systems should remain functional enough to support the response and 
recovery of the community as defined by the performance levels.  
x Extreme  This exceeds the design level for the built environment. (Seismic hazards refer to the 
maximum considered event, which has a probabilistic basis that is supplemented with historical 
data.) Extreme events have a small probability of occurrence (on the order of 2 % to 3 % over a 
50-year period). They also may include anticipated long-term changes in hazards due to climate 
change. This might not be the greatest hazard level that can be envisioned; rather it is one that the 
community believes is possible. Critical facilities and infrastructure systems should remain at 
least minimally functional at this level. Other buildings and infrastructure systems should perform 
at a level that protects the occupants, though they may need to be rescued. Emergency response 
plans should be developed for scenarios based on this hazard level. 
Riverbend experienced a major flood event in 1861 (known locally as the Great Flood), shortly after the 
citys founding. Because there were few buildings and little infrastructure at the time, this event did not 
cause significant damage. There have been a number of lesser flood events through the years, and 
protective measures such as levees were constructed. While the levees limit the effects of flooding, parts 
of the downtown area are prone to flooding and, consequently, have declined over the years. The planning 
team also identified the wastewater treatment plant, National Aircraft Parts factory, and the bridge 
crossing the Central River as potentially vulnerable to flooding. Based on their review of flood hazard 
maps and available historical data for Riverbend, the hazards task group selected the flood events shown 
in Table 9-10 for resilience. 
74 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Since Riverbend had adopted modern codes for buildings and residential construction, the seismic hazard 
was determined from the seismic maps for the area. Therefore, the design event was based on an event 
with 10 % probability of occurrence in 50 years (the 500-year event) and the extreme event was based on 
a 2 % probability of occurrence in 50 years (the 2500-year event). The hazards group reported to the 
planning team that the 500-year event was appropriate to consider for most buildings. The task group also 
stated that buildings and infrastructure systems identified as critical to the community should be designed 
to support critical functions following an extreme event.  
9.4.4. Determine Anticipated Performance (Section 4.1.4) 
With the agreed upon social needs of the community and the corresponding desired performance goals for 
buildings and infrastructure systems, the task groups next completed an analysis of the anticipated 
performance of the built environment for the prevailing community hazards. This analysis answers the 
question of how the communitys existing physical systems will perform relative to the desired 
performance goals. 
The planning team had limited funds to carry out the analysis. The task groups analyzed the existing 
buildings and infrastructure systems using data from past flood and earthquake events in Riverbend, 
reviewed standards and codes to which the structures were built, and used expert judgment to assess 
anticipated performance. In subsequent resilience plan reviews, the team believed that the accuracy of 
these analyses would likely improve as for better tools became available. 
Riverbend estimated the anticipated performance of their building clusters based on each hazard type (i.e., 
earthquake and flood) and hazard level (i.e., routine, design, and extreme). Using the same tables for the 
desired performance goals (Table 9-9), the anticipated performance was recorded, and provided a visual 
summary of the current gap between the desired and anticipated performance. An X is placed in each row 
to indicate the anticipated performance of existing buildings and infrastructure systems at the 90 % 
recovery of function level, given the hazard type and level. 
Based on the anticipated performance for the building clusters and infrastructure systems, the task groups 
estimated the anticipated affected area and disruption level in the community for the design earthquake 
event (see Table 4-6). The affected area is anticipated to be at the community scale, so that while the 
damage is mostly contained within Riverbend, assistance may be needed from nearby communities. The 
anticipated disruption level is moderate, where meaning that critical facilities may be functional but non-
critical systems may be only partially functional.  
The planning team then completed the other anticipated performance goals for the design earthquake, as 
shown in Table 9-11 to Table 9-16. That process is described in the following sections. 
75 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Buildings (Chapter 12 in Volume II). Much of the building stock consists of older construction that used 
the existing design standards and building codes. The task group identified building types that would need 
to be retrofit for design flood (e.g., critical buildings with first floor or equipment below flood level) and 
earthquake events (e.g., unreinforced masonry). The anticipated current performance is shown in Table 
9-11. Occupied building types would perform unsatisfactorily in earthquake events, needed to be 
reinforced or demolished.  
Table 9-11: Riverbend, USA building performance goals for design earthquake 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Design  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Community  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Moderate  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Support 
Building Clusters Days Weeks Months 
Needed4 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Building Performance Category 
A B C D 
Critical Facilities 
Emergency Operation Centers R, S, MS 90%       X  
First Responder Facilities R, S, MS 90%       X  
Memorial Hospital R, S, MS 90%       X  
Non-ambulatory Occupants (prisons, nursing 
R, S, MS 90%       X  
homes, etc.) 
National Aircraft Parts Factory (NAP) R, S, C 90%       X  
Emergency Housing  
Temporary Emergency Shelters R, S 30% 90%       X 
Single and Multi-family Housing (Shelter in 
R, S 60%   90%     X 
place) 
Housing/Neighborhood 
Critical Retail R, S, C  30% 60% 90%     X 
Religious and Spiritual Centers R, S   30% 60% 90%    X 
Single and Multi-family Housing (Full Function) R, S   30%  60%  90%  X 
Schools  R, S   30% 60% 90%    X 
Hotels & Motels R, S, C   30%  60% 90%   X 
Community Recovery 
Businesses  Manufacturing (except NAP) R, S, C    30% 60% 90%   X 
Businesses - Commodity Services R, S, C    30% 60%  90%  X 
Businesses - Service Professions R, S, C    30%  60%  90% X 
Conference & Event Venues R, S, C    30%  60%  90% X 
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
76 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Transportation (Chapter 13 in Volume II). Riverbends transportation system consisted mostly of local 
roads and a bridge. The transportation task group estimated that although some of the local roads would 
be damaged by a design earthquake, resulting in significant cracks in the roads, the transportation system 
would be mostly functional within 2 weeks (indicated as 1-4 weeks in Table 9-12). There could be limited 
damage to the bridge crossing the Central River, but it was expected to be repaired and operational within 
one month.  
Table 9-12: Riverbend, USA transportation infrastructure performance goals for design earthquake  
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Design  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Community  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Moderate  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Transportation Infrastructure  Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Ingress (goods, services, disaster relief) 
Local Roads R, S 60% 90% X             
State Highways and Bridge R, S 60% 90%   X           
Regional Airport R, S   30% 60% 90%   X       
Egress (emergency egress, evacuation, etc) 
Local Roads R, S  60% 90% X             
State Highways and Bridge R, S 60% 90%   X           
Regional Airport R, S   30% 60% 90%   X       
Community resilience 
Critical Facilities 
Hospitals R, S 60% 90% X             
Police and Fire Stations R, S 60% 90% X             
Emergency Operational Centers R, S 60% 90% X             
Emergency Housing 
Residences R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
Emergency Responder Housing R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
Public Shelters R, S 90%   X             
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Essential City Service Facilities R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
Schools R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
Medical Provider Offices R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
Retail R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
Community Recovery 
Residences R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
Neighborhood retail R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
Offices and work places R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
Non-emergency City Services R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
All businesses R, S   30% 60% 90% X         
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
77 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Energy (Chapter 14 in Volume II). The electric power system had performed well in past hazard events. 
The anticipated performance for the design earthquake event, indicated by the Xs, are close to the desired 
performance goals. There was still room for improvement, however. Specifically, improving the 
resilience of the transmission and distribution system would help ensure the timely, sequential recovery of 
electric power service as desired in the community. 
Table 9-13: Riverbend, USA energy infrastructure performance goals for design earthquake  
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Design  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Community  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Moderate  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Energy Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Power - Electric Utilities 
Community Owner or Operated Bulk Generation 
In Place Fueled Generation (Hydro, solar, wind, 
R/C 90% X               
wave, compressed air) 
Transmission and Distribution (including Substations) 
Critical Response Facilities and Support Systems 
Hospitals, Police and Fire Stations / Emergency 
R, C 60% 90% X             
Operations Centers 
Disaster debris / recycling centers/ related lifeline 
R, C 60% 90% X             
systems 
Emergency Housing and Support Systems 
Public Shelters / Nursing Homes / Food 
R, C   60% 90% X           
Distribution Centers 
Emergency shelter for response / recovery 
R, C   60% 90% X           
workforce/ Key Commercial and Finance 
Housing and Neighborhood infrastructure 
Essential city services / schools / Medical offices R, C   60% 90% X           
Houses of worship/meditation/ exercise C   60% 90% X           
Buildings/space for social services (e.g., child 
C   60% 90% X           
services) and prosecution activities 
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
Commercial and industrial businesses / Non-
C     90% X           
emergency city services 
Residential housing restoration R, S, MS, C     90% X           
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
78 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Water (Chapter 16 in Volume II). The main concern of the water and wastewater task group was that the 
bridge crossing the Central River was a potential point-of-failure for the water main pipe coming into 
Riverbend from Fallsborough. Based on past earthquake events in the region, experience, and expert 
judgment, the task group estimated that there would be some damage to the water main crossing the 
bridge in a design earthquake event, even the bridge was expected to perform well. Possible solutions 
included repairing or replacing the water main supports to the bridge or replacing that section of the pipe. 
A pipe failure could take weeks to months to repair, as indicated by the Xs shown in Phase 3 of Table 
9-14, so plans for a temporary water main that could be quickly put in place were also developed.  
Table 9-14: Riverbend, USA water infrastructure performance goals for design earthquake 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Design  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Community  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Moderate  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Water Infrastructure 
Needed4 Days Weeks Months 
24
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 
+ 
Source 
Raw or source water and terminal reservoirs R, S     90%             
Raw water conveyance (pump stations, piping to 
R, S        90%       X   
WTP) 
Potable water at supply (WTP, wells, 
R, S 30%   60% 90%     X     
impoundment) 
Water for fire suppression at key supply points (to 
R, S 90%     X           
promote redundancy) 
Transmission (including Booster Stations) 
Backbone transmission facilities (pipelines, pump 
R, S  90%         X       
stations, and tanks) 
Control Systems 
SCADA or other control systems R, S 30%   60% 90%   X       
Distribution 
Critical Facilities  
Wholesale Users (other communities, rural water 
R, S   60% 90%     X        
districts) 
Hospitals, EOC, Police Station, Fire Stations R, S   60% 90%     X       
Emergency Housing 
Emergency Shelters R, S   60% 90%     X       
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Drink water available at community distribution 
R, S     60% 90%           
centers 
Water for fire suppression at fire hydrants R, S       90%       X   
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
All other clusters R, S     30% 90%       X   
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
79 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Wastewater (Chapter 16 in Volume II). The water and wastewater task group estimated that a design 
earthquake would cause significant damage to the wastewater treatment plant, and it could take months to 
years for repairs to be completed, as indicated in Table 9-15. Replacement of any heavy equipment alone 
could take over a year. The task group developed plans to support basic functionality with temporary 
measures to ensure primary wastewater treatment was provided, as needed, by the intermediate recovery 
phase. 
Table 9-15: Riverbend, USA wastewater infrastructure performance goals for design earthquake 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Design  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Community  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Moderate  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Wastewater Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Treatment Plants 
Treatment plants operating with primary 
R, S     60% 90%     X    
treatment and disinfection  
Treatment plants operating to meet regulatory 
R, S       30%     60% 90% X 
requirements 
Trunk Lines 
Backbone collection facilities (major trunkline, 
lift stations, siphons, relief mains, aerial R, S     30%   60% 90%     X 
crossings) 
Flow equalization basins R, S     30%   60% 90%     X 
Control Systems 
SCADA and other control systems R, S       30%   60% 90%   X 
Collection Lines 
Critical Facilities  
Hospitals, EOC, Police Station, Fire Stations R, S     30% 90%       X   
Emergency Housing 
Emergency Shelters R, S     30% 90%       X   
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Threats to public health and safety controlled by 
containing & routing raw sewage away from R, S   30%   60% 90%     X   
public 
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
All other clusters R, S       30%   60%   90% X 
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
80 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Communications (Chapter 15 in Volume II). The communication task group stated that the performance 
goals in Table 9-16 were desirable, but they would need to work with local service providers to meet the 
long-term community development goals. It was noted that, based on performance for routine events, the 
communications infrastructure performed reasonably well, partly due to the redundancy in the network. 
Based on discussions with the service providers, the regional Central Office (outside of the community) 
was anticipated to be fully functional about 2 weeks after a design earthquake (indicated as 1-4 weeks in 
Table 9-16). Though it was anticipated that the last mile of distribution for much of the city would not 
be fully functional until 8-12 weeks after a design earthquake, the task group also noted that the local 
service providers were already undertaking efforts that would result in performance being more in-line 
with the goals shown in the table.  
Table 9-16: Riverbend, USA communications infrastructure performance goals for design earthquake 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Design  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Community  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Moderate  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Communications Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Core Communications Buildings 
Communications Hub (e.g., Central Office, IXP, 
R, S, C 90%     X           
Data Centers, etc.) 
Last Mile Distribution 
Critical Facilities  
Hospitals R, S, C 90%     X           
Police and fire stations R, S, C 90%     X           
Emergency Operation Center R, S, C 90%     X           
Emergency Housing 
Residences R, S, C     60% 90%   X      
Emergency responder housing R, S, C     60% 90%   X      
Public Shelters R, S, C     60% 90%   X      
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Essential city service facilities R, S, C     30% 90%  X      
Schools R, S, C     30% 90%  X      
Medical provider offices R, S, C     30% 90%  X      
Retail R, S, C     30% 90%  X     
 
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
Residences R, S, C     30% 90%  X      
Neighborhood retail R, S, C     30% 90%    X    
Offices and work places R, S, C     30% 90%  X      
Non-emergency city services R, S, C     30% 90%    X    
Businesses R, S, C     30% 90%    X    
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
81 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
9.4.5. Summarize the Results (Section 4.1.5) 
Develop Summary Resilience Tables. The planning team developed a summary resilience table (Table 
9-17) of the desired and anticipated performance goals for the building clusters and infrastructure system. 
Those tables helped the planning team identify dependencies between infrastructure systems and 
buildings for each building cluster. These dependencies, along with the resilience gaps identified within 
the individual buildings and infrastructure systems, supported decisions about sequencing recovery of 
functions, and about which investments would best address their community resilience goals.  
Table 9-17: Riverbend, USA summary resilience table of performance goals for design earthquake  
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Design  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Community  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Moderate  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Summary Resilience Table Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Critical Facilities 
Buildings 90%             X   
Transportation   90% X             
Energy   90% X             
Water     90%   X         
Wastewater       90%       X   
Communication  90%   X 
           
Emergency Housing 
Buildings       90%         X 
Transportation     90% X           
Energy     90% X           
Water     90%   X         
Wastewater       90%       X   
Communication       90% X         
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Buildings           90%     X 
Transportation     90% X           
Energy     90% X           
Water       90%       X   
Wastewater         90%     X   
Communication       90%     X     
Community Recovery 
Buildings               90% X 
Transportation       90% X         
Energy     90% X           
Water       90%       X   
Wastewater             90% X   
Communication       90%     X     
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
82 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
9.4.6. Repeat Process for Each Hazard Type and Level 
The process of determining desired performance goals and anticipated performance for building clusters 
and infrastructure systems was completed for each hazard type and level. The previous text in this section 
summarized the process used for the design earthquake event. Performance goal tables for the routine 
earthquake and extreme flood events are also included in this example, with the tables listed in Table 9-9 
provided at the end of the example. The performance goals and anticipated performance are summarized 
as follows. 
Routine Earthquake. The performance goal for the routine earthquake event was to experience little or 
no disruption to community functions, or the supporting building clusters and infrastructure systems. As 
shown in Table 9-18 to Table 9-23, the performance goals were mostly shifted to the left (i.e., shorter 
recovery time) as a result. The anticipated performance for the routine event was also estimated to be 
much better than for the design event, with little damage to buildings expected to occur. The summary 
resilience table for the routine earthquake event is shown in Table 9-24. Only a limited amount of 
disruption was anticipated, but this performance did not quite meet the desired performance goals. 
Extreme Flood. The hazards task group found that much of the community would be vulnerable to an 
extreme flood event. Unlike the routine and design earthquake events, the desired performance goals were 
established with the expectation that many of the existing buildings and infrastructure systems were not 
designed for an extreme flood event, and that the community would be facing a significant recovery 
situation. However, future improved design and mitigation strategies were identified for critical 
infrastructure to achieve the desired performance goals. Table 9-25 to Table 9-30 show the desired 
performance goals and anticipated performance of the building clusters and infrastructure systems for the 
extreme flood event. Table 9-31 shows the summary resilience table. The performance goals and 
anticipated performance for the extreme flood event have longer recovery times than would be expected 
for a design event.  
9.5. Step 4: Plan Development (Chapter 5 of the Guide) 
Evaluate Gaps Between Desired and Anticipated Performance. 
Once the performance goal tables were filled out, the resilience 
gaps were identified (i.e., difference between the anticipated 90 
% performance, X, and the desired 90 % performance goals). As 
can be seen in Table 9-17 (as well as Table 9-24 and Table 9-31), 
building clusters had some of the largest resilience gaps, and 
improving the performance of buildings in Riverbend was a 
priority. Water performance also showed a large performance 
gap in the summary table, and was also likely to be a priority. 
 
Based on the three long-term community goals, the planning 
team worked with the task groups to identify solutions and investments would be most beneficial for 
Riverbend resilience. Identifying solutions to address the resilience gaps led to a long-term strategy that 
improved community resilience and met the community goals.  
Identify Solutions to Address Gaps. During the planning process, the team considered many projects that 
could be funded over a 50-year period to achieve the community goals. The team also identified short-
term solutions that could be implemented because many of the larger investments required more resources 
than currently available and would be implemented over time. Administrative and construction solutions 
were developed by the tasks groups for consideration by the entire planning team. 
83 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Short-Term Administrative Solutions.  
Communications  Charging Stations. The last mile of the communications infrastructure system was  
vulnerable to the earthquake and flood design event. The communications task group worked with service 
providers to develop potential solutions. Based upon their discussions, they recommended purchasing 
charging stations for cellular phones and deploying them after an event when external power is lost. 
These stations are commonly brought in by service providers after hazard events, but an adequate supply 
for businesses and residents was needed. 
Long-Term Administrative Solutions. 
Buildings Downtown. The part of the downtown area that is less prone to flooding has been well-
preserved and has flourished in recent years as restaurants and shops moved in. However, the portion of 
the downtown area that experiences frequent flooding has begun to languish, and small businesses in this 
part of town are struggling. The planning team determined whether the well-preserved part of downtown 
and its residents were subject to risks from more severe hazards events than recently experienced by 
Riverbend. The task groups found that the buildings in this area were vulnerable to a design flood and 
vulnerable to collapse in a design earthquake. Therefore, the task groups recommended the following 
actions: 
x The city government should undertake buy-back programs for the downtown area. Houses and 
commercial properties in the 100-year flood zone and those in a state of disrepair would be 
purchased. These properties would be razed. To reduce negative impacts on residents, the city 
would financially assist residents and businesses with relocation to locations that would perform 
well during design flood and earthquake events. Hopefully, the relocated businesses would 
contribute to stabilizing employment and economic growth.  
x Eventually, the land would be used to create a city-owned golf course. The golf course would 
provide jobs for management, food services, grounds keeping/maintenance. It would also provide 
a source of entertainment for residents, and additional income to Riverbend, while allowing a 
spillway for floods. 
Energy  Critical Facilities and Government Offices. The energy task group wanted to ensure 
government offices and critical facilities could continue operation during and immediately following a 
disruptive event or return to service quickly. They proposed that an energy assurance plan be developed 
to ensure police and fire stations, government offices, and critical facilities had sufficient power to allow 
them to operate emergency services until grid power could be restored. The energy task group would 
work with the regional electric utility to develop and implement cost-effective measures. 
Short-Term Construction Solutions. 
Water  Redundant Source. Pending a redundant water supply with the proposed new bridge (see long-
term construction solutions), the water and wastewater task group advocated that the city restore three 
wells to provide a redundant water supply. These wells supplied Riverbend with water before the water 
main from Fallsborough was installed. 
Long-Term Construction Solutions. 
Buildings Downtown. The city should implement a seismic retrofit program to improve the performance 
of older, earthquake-vulnerable buildings. Some of these buildings pose a life safety risk during an 
earthquake. A plan would be developed that was affordable for building and business owners in the 
84 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
downtown district. Funding mechanisms considered included owner tax credits and city-financed loans. 
Building types that pose a life safety risk should be prioritized for improvement or moved to the buyback 
program. 
Transportation  Highway Bridge. The single highway bridge over the Central River was identified as 
critical infrastructure for the community. Its failure would result in significant disruptions to commuters 
and trucks transporting goods since the nearest bridge was 10 miles away. The bridge also carried the 
water main from Fallsborough into Riverbend, so failure of the bridge would also sever the one source of 
water for Riverbend. 
The bridge was vulnerable to design earthquake and extreme flood events. It had been maintained but had 
not been retrofitted to modern bridge design standard. Because the existing bridge was scheduled and 
budgeted for a deck replacement in 10 years, there was an opportunity to complete a seismic upgrade. 
However, the transportation task group completed a cost benefit analysis of completing a seismic 
upgrade, elevating the bridge deck, and mitigating against scour at the piers. The task group concluded 
that a bridge having an elevated surface was needed, and found that it was more practical and economical 
to construct a new bridge at a higher elevation. They recommended construction of a new bridge at a 
higher elevation rather than elevating the existing bridge. 
The transportation task group recommended that they work with the State Department of Transportation 
to seek support for construction of a second bridge crossing. A second bridge would relieve congestion 
during high traffic periods when traffic volume exceeds the capacity of the bridge, increase redundancy of 
a critical transportation route and water system, and support regional growth.  
Wastewater/Businesses  Flood Protection Levee. The wastewater treatment plant and the National 
Aircraft Parts (NAP) plant were both located in the flood plain. Because NAP was a large employer, it 
was important to the community that the factory remain in Riverbend. The planning team identified 
potential solutions to limit the vulnerability of these two facilities to flooding.  
They recommended that the city partner with the state to pursue a mitigation grant to build a flood control 
levee to protect both facilities. The levee design should consider the seismic performance of the levees 
and potential for subsequent flooding before levees could be repaired and functional again. 
Prioritize Solutions and Develop Implementation Strategy. The planning team worked with the task 
groups to prioritize the proposed solutions to develop an implementation strategy over 50 years. The 
proposed strategy and schedule, which considered the relative benefits of each solution, were outlined as 
follows:  
1. Purchase charging stations that could be deployed following a hazard event and made available 
for community events. This will occur within 6 months of resilience plan approval. 
2. Initiate the buy-back program within two years, and plan for it to be completed over 25-30 years. 
If additional resources become available, the program could be accelerated.  
3. Develop the golf course over the same time period. Revenues from the golf course would support 
other resilience solutions. 
4. Apply for a FEMA Pre-Disaster Mitigation (PDM) program grant with the state.  
5. Restore three city wells to provide a redundant water supply. The project (inspect, test, and retain 
the appropriate permits and approvals) is anticipated to take 3-5 years. 
6. Develop and implement an energy assurance plan in 5-10 years. The plan could be completed 
more quickly, but it is not the highest priority because the energy system performed well in past 
flood and earthquake events in the region.  
7. Engage with the State DOT to advocate for a new bridge to be completed within 5-10 years.  
85 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
8. Develop plans to replace the existing bridge after the 2nd bridge is completed.  
9. Develop incentives and financial mechanisms for business owners in the downtown area to 
implement seismic retrofits, and work with them to do so. This program should be initiated in the 
next 3 years and completed within 20 years.  
9.6. Step 5: Plan Preparation, Review, and Approval (Chapter 6) 
The draft resilience plan was prepared and submitted to the Riverbend 
City Council. The plan contained the community resilience goals and the 
prioritized implementation strategy, as well as the following supporting 
information: 
 
x Summary report characterizing the social dimensions of Riverbend  
x Summary report characterizing the built environment of Riverbend 
x Tables and associated text that describe the linkages between the built and social environments 
x A list of the long-term community goals and associated metrics 
x Summary report defining Riverbends hazards types and levels  
x Performance tables and associated text explaining the desired performance goals for the built 
environment and the anticipated performance of the built environment  
x Summary resilience tables and associated text, including identification of the dependencies 
among buildings and infrastructure systems and the gaps between desired and anticipated 
performance 
x The administrative and construction solutions developed by Riverbend to address gaps in 
performance 
x Proposed prioritization and scheduling of implementation of the resilience strategies 
Once the plan was developed, the planning team publicized its release and formally opened a 60-day 
public comment period to collect input from additional stakeholders. To engage the community, the team 
organized two community City Hall meetings, two weeks apart during the first month of the plans 
release. Local media were encouraged to cover the proposed plan, and Ms. Smith and several members of 
the planning team met with reporters.  
Additionally, the planning team disseminated the draft plan to all task groups, encouraging them to 
distribute the plan throughout their organizations, departments, and agencies for review. After the public 
comment period, the planning team finalized Riverbends resilience plan and submitted it to the City 
Council for approval. The community was widely informed of the plans approval once it was signed by 
the Mayor.  
86 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
9.7. Step 6: Plan Implementation and Maintenance (Chapter 7) 
Once the plan was approved, Riverbend began the implementation 
process, starting with the short-term solutions. City staff began contacting 
vendors about bulk purchasing of charging stations for cellular phones. 
They were able to purchase these charging stations at a bulk rate within 4 
months of the resilience plan approval (2 months faster than anticipated).  
Riverbend also began engaging in some long-term solutions. For example, 
within the first 6 months, Riverbend worked with the state to apply for a 
FEMA Pre-Disaster Mitigation (PDM) program grant. The deadline for 
the first funding cycle had passed by the time Riverbends plan was 
finalized. However, they were successful in attaining funding for  
construction of the flood control levee during year two of the implementation.  
Throughout the implementation of their resilience plan, the citys leaders tracked progress and posted it 
on the citys website. Riverbend decided to review their resilience plan on an annual basis and to assess 
whether the implementation strategy or any solutions required modification. 
9.8. Looking Forward  
The development, approval, and implementation of the Riverbend resilience plan had several immediate 
benefits. The community became more informed and engaged in civic affairs, and they began to share the 
vision for their community, as evidenced by increased participation in organizations and meetings. 
Communication between stakeholders developed into regular exchanges that provided daily benefits to 
their businesses and operations, as well as the community. All the community plans were aligned with the 
resilience goals over the next planning cycle, ensuring consistency in efforts and allocation of resources. 
The value of the resilience goals and implementation of the solutions was understood by the community 
as a long-term work in progress. The resilience leadership kept the stakeholders informed of progress and 
setbacks. The transparency led to strong, continued support in the community. 
87 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
9.9. Supplemental Information: Routine Earthquake Performance Goals Tables 
Table 9-18: Riverbend, USA buildings performance goals for routine earthquake 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Support 
Building Clusters Days Weeks Months 
Needed4 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Building Performance Category 
A B C D 
Critical Facilities 
Emergency Operation Centers R, S, MS 90% X               
First Responder Facilities R, S, MS 90% X               
Acute Care Hospitals R, S, MS 90% X               
Non-ambulatory Occupants (prisons, nursing 
R, S, MS  90% X               
homes, etc.) 
National Aircraft Parts Factory (NAP) R, S, C 90% X        
Emergency Housing 
Temporary Emergency Shelters R, S 90%   X             
Single / Multi-family Housing (Shelter in place) R, S 90%   X             
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Critical Retail R, S, C 90%   X             
Religious and Spiritual Centers R, S 90%   X             
Single and Multi-family Housing (Full Function) R, S 90%   X             
Schools  R, S 90%   X             
Hotels & Motels R, S, C 90%   X             
Community Recovery 
Businesses  Manufacturing (except NAP) R, S, C 60% 90% X             
Businesses - Commodity Services R, S, C 60% 90% X             
Businesses - Service Professions R, S, C 60% 90% X             
Conference & Event Venues R, S, C 60% 90% X             
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
88 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-19: Riverbend, USA transportation infrastructure performance goals for routine earthquake 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Transportation Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Ingress (goods, services, disaster relief) 
Local Roads R, S 90% X               
State Highways and Bridge R, S 90% X               
Regional Airport R, S 60% 90% X             
Egress (emergency egress, evacuation, etc) 
Local Roads R, S 90% X               
State Highways and Bridge R, S 90% X               
Regional Airport R, S 60% 90% X             
Community resilience 
Critical Facilities 
Hospitals R, S 90% X               
Police and Fire Stations R, S 90% X               
Emergency Operational Centers R, S 90% X               
Emergency Housing 
Residences R, S 90% X               
Emergency Responder Housing R, S 90% X               
Public Shelters R, S 90% X               
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Essential City Service Facilities R, S 60% 90% X             
Schools R, S 60% 90% X             
Medical Provider Offices R, S 60% 90% X             
Retail R, S 60% 90% X             
Community Recovery 
Residences R, S 60% 90% X             
Neighborhood retail R, S 60% 90% X             
Offices and work places R, S 60% 90% X             
Non-emergency City Services R, S 60% 90% X             
All businesses R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
89 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-20: Riverbend, USA energy infrastructure performance goals for routine earthquake 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized   90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Energy Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Power - Electric Utilities 
Community Owner or Operated Bulk Generation 
In Place Fueled Generation (Hydro, solar, wind, 
R, S, MS 90%                 
wave, compressed air) 
Transmission and Distribution (including Substations) 
Critical Response Facilities and Support Systems 
Hospitals, Police and Fire Stations / Emergency 
R, C 90% X               
Operations Centers 
Disaster debris / recycling centers/ Related 
R, C 90% X               
lifeline systems 
Emergency Housing and Support Systems 
Public Shelters / Nursing Homes / Food 
R, C 90% X               
Distribution Centers 
Emergency shelter for response / recovery 
R, C 90% X               
workforce/ Key Commercial and Finance 
Housing and Neighborhood infrastructure 
Essential city services facilities / schools / 
R, C   90% X 
Medical offices            
Houses of worship/meditation/ exercise C    90% X             
Buildings/space for social services (e.g., child 
C    90% X             
services) and prosecution activities 
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
Commercial and industrial businesses / Non-
C   90% X             
emergency city services 
Residential housing restoration R, S, MS, C   90% X             
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
90 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-21: Riverbend, USA water infrastructure performance goals for routine earthquake 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Water Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Source 
Raw or source water and terminal reservoirs R, S 90%   X             
Raw water conveyance (pump stations and piping 
R, S  90%   X             
to WTP) 
Potable water at supply (WTP, wells, 
R, S 90%   X             
impoundment) 
Water for fire suppression at key supply points (to 
R, S 90%   X             
promote redundancy) 
Transmission (including Booster Stations) 
Backbone transmission facilities (pipelines, pump 
R, S  90%   X             
stations, and tanks) 
Control Systems 
SCADA or other control systems R, S 90%   X             
Distribution 
Critical Facilities 
Wholesale Users (other communities, rural water 
R, S 90%   X             
districts) 
Hospitals, EOC, Police Station, Fire Stations R, S 90%   X             
Emergency Housing 
Emergency Shelters R, S 90%   X             
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Drink water available at community distribution 
R, S   90%   X           
centers 
Water for fire suppression at fire hydrants R, S   90%   X           
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
All other clusters R, S     90% X           
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
91 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-22: Riverbend, USA wastewater infrastructure performance goals for routine earthquake 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Wastewater Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Treatment Plants 
Treatment plants operating with primary 
R, S     90% X           
treatment and disinfection 
Treatment plants operating to meet regulatory 
R, S     90% X           
requirements 
Trunk Lines 
Backbone collection facilities (major trunkline, 
lift stations, siphons, relief mains, aerial R, S   60% 90% X           
crossings) 
Flow equalization basins R, S   60% 90% X           
Control Systems 
SCADA and other control systems R, S 90%   X             
Collection Lines 
Critical Facilities 
Hospitals, EOC, Police Station, Fire Stations R, S   90% X             
Emergency Housing 
Emergency Shelters R, S   90% X             
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Threats to public health and safety controlled by 
containing & routing raw sewage away from R, S   60% 90% X           
public 
Community Recovery Infrastructure 
All other clusters R, S   60% 90% X           
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
92 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-23: Riverbend, USA communications performance goals for routine earthquake 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Communications Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Core Communications Buildings 
Communications Hub (e.g., Central Office, IXP, 
R, S, C 90%   X             
Data Centers, etc.) 
Last Mile 
Critical Facilities 
Hospitals R, S, C 90%   X             
Police and fire stations R, S, C 90%   X             
Emergency operation center R, S, C 90%   X             
Emergency Housing 
Residences R, S, C 90%     X           
Emergency responder housing R, S, C 90%     X           
Public shelters R, S, C 90%     X           
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Essential city service facilities R, S, C 60% 90%   X           
Schools R, S, C 60% 90%   X           
Medical provider offices R, S, C 60% 90%   X           
Retail R, S, C 60% 90%   X           
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
Residences R, S, C 60% 90%   X           
Neighborhood retail R, S, C 60% 90%   X           
Offices and work places R, S, C 60% 90%   X           
Non-emergency city services R, S, C 60% 90%   X           
Businesses R, S, C 60% 90%   X           
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
93 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-24: Riverbend, USA summary resilience table of performance goals for routine earthquake 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Summary Resilience Table Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Critical Facilities 
Buildings 90% X               
Transportation 90% X               
Energy 90% X               
Water 90%   X             
Wastewater   90% X             
Communication 90%   X             
Emergency Housing 
Buildings 90%   X             
Transportation 90% X               
Energy 90% X               
Water 90%   X             
Wastewater   90% X             
Communication 90%     X           
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Buildings 90%   X             
Transportation   90% X             
Energy   90% X             
Water   90%   X           
Wastewater     90% X           
Communication   90%   X           
Community Recovery 
Buildings   90% X             
Transportation     90% X           
Energy   90% X             
Water     90% X           
Wastewater     90% X           
Communication   90%   X           
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
94 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
9.10. Supplemental Information: Extreme Flood Performance Goals Tables 
Table 9-25: Riverbend, USA building performance goals for extreme flood 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Flood   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Regional  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Support 
Building Clusters Days Weeks Months 
Needed4 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Building Performance Category 
A B C D 
Critical Facilities 
Emergency Operation Centers R, S, MS 90%               X 
First Responder Facilities R, S, MS 90%               X 
Acute Care Hospitals R, S, MS 30%   60%   90%       X 
Non-ambulatory Occupants (prisons, nursing 
R, S, MS 30%     60%   90%     X 
homes, etc.) 
Anything Aircrafts Part Factory (NAP) R, S, C 30%   60%  90%   X 
Emergency Housing 
Temporary Emergency Shelters R, S 30%   60% 90%         X 
Single and Multi-family Housing (Shelter in 
R, S 30%     60%   90%     X 
place) 
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Critical Retail R, S, C     30% 60% 90%       X 
Religious and Spiritual Centers R, S     30%   60% 90%     X 
Single and Multi-family Housing (Full Function) R, S       30%   60% 90%   X 
Schools  R, S       30% 60% 90%     X 
Hotels & Motels R, S, C       30%   60% 90%   X 
Community Recovery 
Businesses  Manufacturing (except NAP) R, S, C       30%   60%   90% X 
Businesses - Commodity Services R, S, C       30%   60%   90% X 
Businesses - Service Professions R, S, C         30%   60% 90% X 
Conference & Event Venues R, S, C         30%   60% 90% X 
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
95 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-26: Riverbend, USA transportation infrastructure performance goals for extreme flood 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Flood   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Regional  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Transportation Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Ingress (goods, services, disaster relief) 
Local Roads R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
State Highways and Bridge R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Regional Airport R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Egress (emergency egress, evacuation, etc) 
Local Roads R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
State Highways and Bridge R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Regional Airport R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Community resilience 
Critical Facilities 
Hospitals R, S 30% 60% 90%   X         
Police and Fire Stations R, S 30% 60% 90%   X         
Emergency Operational Centers R, S 30% 60% 90%   X         
Emergency Housing 
Residences R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Emergency Responder Housing R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
Public Shelters R, S 30% 60% 90% X           
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Essential City Service Facilities R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Schools R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Medical Provider Offices R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Retail R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Community Recovery 
Residences R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Neighborhood retail R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Offices and work places R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Non-emergency City Services R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
All businesses R, S     30% 60% 90% X       
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
96 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-27: Riverbend, USA energy infrastructure performance goals for extreme flood 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Flood   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Regional  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Energy Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Power - Electric Utilities 
Community Owner or Operated Bulk Generation 
In Place Fueled Generation (Hydro, solar, wind, 
R/C   90% X             
wave, compressed air) 
Transmission and Distribution (including Substations) 
Critical Response Facilities and Support Systems 
Hospitals, Police and Fire Stations / Emergency 
R, C     60% 90%  X          
Operations Centers 
Disaster debris / recycling centers/ Related 
R, C     60% 90%  X          
lifeline systems 
Emergency Housing and Support Systems 
Public Shelters / Nursing Homes / Food 
R, C     60% 90%  X 
Distribution Centers         
Emergency shelter for response / recovery 
R, C     60% 90%  X
workforce/ Key Commercial and Finance          
Housing and Neighborhood infrastructure 
Essential city services facilities / schools / 
R, C     60% 90% X         
Medical offices 
Houses of worship/meditation/ exercise C      60% 90% X         
Buildings/space for social services (e.g., child 
C      60% 90% X         
services) and prosecution activities 
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
Commercial and industrial businesses / Non-
C     60% 90% X         
emergency city services 
Residential housing restoration R, S, MS, C     60% 90% X         
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
97 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-28: Riverbend, USA water infrastructure performance goals for extreme flood 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Flood   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Regional  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Water Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Source 
Raw or source water and terminal reservoirs R, S, MS 30%   60% 90%     X     
Raw water conveyance (pump stations and piping 
R, S, MS       60% 90%     X   
to WTP) 
Potable water at supply (WTP, wells, 
R, S, MS     30% 60% 90%     X   
impoundment) 
Water for fire suppression at key supply points (to 
R, S, MS     90% X           
promote redundancy) 
Transmission (including Booster Stations) 
Backbone transmission facilities (pipelines, pump 
R, S, MS 30%       60%   90% X   
stations, and tanks) 
Control Systems 
SCADA or other control systems R, S, MS       30% 60% 90%  X     
Distribution 
Critical Facilities 
Wholesale Users (other communities, rural water 
R, S, MS         60%   90% X   
districts) 
Hospitals, EOC, Police Station, Fire Stations R, S, MS       60% 90%   X     
Emergency Housing 
Emergency Shelters R, S, MS       60% 90%   X     
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Drink water available at community distribution 
R, S, MS     30% 60% 90%   X     
centers 
Water for fire suppression at fire hydrants R, S, MS       60% 90%     X   
Community Recovery Infrastructure 
All other clusters R, S, MS           60% 90%   X 
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
98 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-29: Riverbend, USA wastewater infrastructure performance goals for extreme flood  
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Flood   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Regional  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Wastewater Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Treatment Plants 
Treatment plants operating with primary 
R, S, MS       30% 60%   90% X   
treatment and disinfection 
Treatment plants operating to meet regulatory 
R, S, MS               90% X 
requirements 
Trunk Lines 
Backbone collection facilities (major trunkline, 
lift stations, siphons, relief mains, aerial R, S, MS         30% 60%   90% X 
crossings) 
Flow equalization basins R, S, MS         30% 60%   90% X 
Control Systems 
SCADA and other control systems R, S, MS           60%   90% X 
Collection Lines 
Critical Facilities 
Hospitals, EOC, Police Station, Fire Stations R, S, MS       30% 90%     X   
Emergency Housing 
Emergency Shelters R, S, MS       30% 90%     X   
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Threats to public health and safety controlled by 
containing & routing raw sewage away from R, S, MS       30% 60% 90%   X   
public 
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
All other clusters R, S, MS           60%   90% X 
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
99 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-30: Riverbend, USA communications infrastructure performance goals for extreme flood 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Flood   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Regional  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Communications Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Core Communications Buildings 
Communications Hub (e.g., Central Office, IXP, 
R, S, MS, C 90%     X           
Data Centers, etc.) 
Last Mile 
Critical Facilities  
Hospitals R, S, MS, C 90%     X           
Police and fire stations R, S, MS, C 90%     X           
Emergency operation center R, S, MS, C 90%     X           
Emergency Housing 
Residences R, S, MS, C     30% 90%     X     
Emergency responder housing R, S, MS, C     30% 90%     X     
Public shelters R, S, MS, C     30% 90%     X     
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Essential city service facilities R, S, MS, C     30% 60% 90%   X     
Schools R, S, MS, C     30% 60% 90%   X     
Medical provider offices R, S, MS, C     30% 60% 90%   X     
Retail R, S, MS, C     30% 60% 90%   X     
Community Recovery Infrastructure 
Residences R, S, MS, C     30% 60% 90%     X   
Neighborhood retail R, S, MS, C     30% 60% 90%     X   
Offices and work places R, S, MS, C     30% 60% 90%     X   
Non-emergency city services R, S, MS, C     30% 60% 90%     X   
Businesses R, S, MS, C     30% 60% 90%     X   
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
100 
 
Community Resilience Planning Example  Riverbend, USA 
Table 9-31: Riverbend, USA summary resilience table of performance goals for extreme flood  
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Flood   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Regional  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Summary Resilience Table Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Critical Facilities 
Buildings           90%     X 
Transportation     90%   X         
Energy    90% X     
Water             90% X   
Wastewater         90%     X   
Communication 90%     X           
Emergency Housing 
Buildings           90%     X 
Transportation       90%   X       
Energy    90% X     
Water         90%   X     
Wastewater         90%     X   
Communication       90%     X     
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Buildings             90%   X 
Transportation       90%   X       
Energy       90% X         
Water         90%     X   
Wastewater           90%   X   
Communication         90%   X     
Community Recovery 
Buildings               90% X 
Transportation       90%   X       
Energy       90% X         
Water             90%   X 
Wastewater               90% X 
Communication         90%     X   
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90% restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
101 
 
Glossary 
Glossary 
List of Terms 
Term Definition 
Buildings Individual structures, including its equipment and contents, that house people and 
support social institutions. 
Built Capital Buildings and infrastructure systems, including transportation, energy, water, 
wastewater, and communication and information systems. 
Built Environment All buildings and infrastructure systems. Also referred to as built capital. 
Business Continuity x The capability of an organization or business to continue delivery of products or 
services at acceptable predefined levels following a disruptive incident. [ISO 
22301, 2012]. 
x An ongoing process to ensure that the necessary steps are taken to identify the 
impacts of potential losses and maintain viable recovery strategies, recovery 
plans, and continuity of services [NFPA 1600, 2013]. 
Clusters A set of buildings and supporting infrastructure systems, not necessarily 
geographically co-located, that serve a common function such as housing, healthcare, 
retail, etc. 
Communication and Equipment and systems that facilitate communication services, including Internet, 
Information Systems cellular and phone services. 
Community  x In the NPG, the term community refers to groups with common goals, values, 
or purposes (e.g., local businesses, neighborhood groups).  
x In this Guide, however, the term community refers to a place designated by 
geographical boundaries that functions under the jurisdiction of a governance 
structure, such as a town, city, or county. It is within these places that people 
live, work, play, and build their futures. 
Community Resilience x The ability to adapt to changing conditions and withstand and rapidly recover 
from disruption due to emergencies [PPD-8, 2011]. 
x The ability to prepare for and adapt to changing conditions and to withstand and 
recover rapidly from disruptions. Resilience includes the ability to withstand and 
recover from deliberate attacks, accidents, or naturally occurring threats or 
incidents [PPD-21, 2013]. 
Community Social A complex, organized pattern of beliefs and behavior that meets basic individual, 
Institutions household, and community needs, including family/kinship, government, economy, 
health, education, community service organizations, religious and cultural groups 
(and other belief systems), and the media. 
Critical Facilities Buildings that are intended to remain operational during hazard events and support 
functions and services needed during the short-term phase of recovery. These 
facilities are sometimes referred to as essential buildings. 
102 
 
Glossary 
Term Definition 
Critical Infrastructure Systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so vital to the  that the 
incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact 
on security, national economic security, national public health or safety, or any 
combination of those matters [PPD-21, 2013]. 
Dependency The reliance of physical and/or social systems on other physical and/or social 
systems to function or provide services. 
Disaster A serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society causing 
widespread human, material, economic or environmental losses which exceed the 
ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources [National 
Science and Technology Council, 2005]. 
Disruption The consequences of a hazard event that results in loss of services or functions in a 
community. 
Emergency Responders Official and volunteer workers during the short-term phase of recovery, also referred 
to as the response phase. 
Energy Systems Electric power, liquid fuel, and natural gas generation, transmission, and distribution. 
Financial Capital Financial savings, income, investments, and available credit. 
Function The role or purpose of a particular institution (e.g., education, finance, healthcare) 
within a community. 
Functionality Capability of serving the intended function, where the built environment provides an 
operational level that allows a social institution to provide services.  
General Plan A document designed to guide the future actions of a community, with long-range 
goals and objectives for the local government, including land development, 
expenditure of public funds, tax policy (tax incentives), cooperative efforts, and other 
issues of interest (such as farmland preservation, or the rehabilitation of older 
neighborhoods areas). Also referred to as a comprehensive plan, master plan, or land 
use plan [Extension, 2015].  
Governance Structures The governing body of a community.  
Hazard A potential threat or an incident, natural or human-caused, that warrants action to 
protect life, property, the environment, and public health or safety, and to minimize 
disruptions of government, social, or economic activities [PPD-21 2013].  
Hazard Event The occurrence of a hazard. 
Hazard Impact The quantification of the community consequences of a hazard through affected area 
and level of disruption measures 
Hazard Level The quantification of the size, magnitude, or intensity of a hazard, such as wind 
speed, seismic ground acceleration, flood elevation, etc.  
103 
 
Glossary 
Term Definition 
Human Caused A hazard event caused by human error or a deliberate action including a terrorist 
Disaster activity.  
Implementation A planned set of actions that taken together will help meet a goal. To achieve 
Strategies community resilience, a set of solutions may include land use planning, codes and 
standards for new construction, and specific retrofit requirements.  
Infrastructure System Physical networks, systems and structures that make up transportation, energy, 
communications, water and wastewater, and other systems that support the 
functionality of community social institutions.  
Life Safety Life safety in the built environment refers to buildings and other structures designed 
to protect and evacuate populations in emergencies and during hazard events. 
Mitigation Activities and actions taken to reduce loss of life and property by lessening the 
impact of hazard events. 
Performance Goals Metrics or specific objectives that define successful performance. For the built 
environment, performance goals include objectives related to desirable features, such 
as occupant protection or time for repairs and return to function.  
Redundancy The use of multiple critical components in a system to increase reliability of system 
performance and function, particularly when one of the multiple components is 
damaged. 
Retrofitting Improving the expected performance of existing buildings and infrastructure systems 
through remedial repairs and measures that often improve system resistance or 
strength.  
Robustness The ability of a structure or system to continue operating or functioning under a 
variety of demands or conditions.  
Shelter-in-place Safely remaining in a building, e.g., a residence, during or after a hazard event.  
Social Capital Broadly the term refers to social networks, the reciprocities that arise from them, 
and the value of these for achieving mutual goals [Schuller, Baron, and Field 2000].  
Stakeholders  All parties that have an interest or concern in an operation, enterprise, or undertaking.  
Technological Hazard  A human-caused event due to an accident or human error. 
Transportation Buildings, structures, and networks that move people and goods, including roads, 
Systems bridges, rail systems, airports, coastal or riverine ports, and trucking hubs. 
Vulnerable populations Groups of individuals within a community whose needs may go unmet before or after 
a disaster event, including the elderly, people living in poverty, racial and ethnic 
minority groups, people with disabilities, and those suffering from chronic illness. 
Additional social vulnerabilities can include renters, students, single-parent families, 
small business owners, culturally diverse groups, and historic neighborhoods. 
104 
 
Glossary 
Term Definition 
Wastewater Systems Systems that collect wastewater, move it through a system of pipelines and pump 
stations to treatment plants and discharge into a receiving water. 
Water Systems Systems that are supplied by either surface or ground water, treat and store the water, 
and move it to the end user through a system of pipelines. 
Whole Community The National Preparedness Goal defines whole community for preparedness efforts 
to strengthen the security and resiliency of the  and includes individuals, 
communities, the private and nonprofit sectors, faith-based organizations, and 
Federal, state, and local governments.  
Workforce People who provide labor to one or more of the community social, business, industry, 
and economic institutions.  
105 
 
Glossary 
References 
eXtension (2015) The Purpose of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, eXtension Foundation, 
Centreville, AL, http://www.extension.org/pages/26677/the-purpose-of-the-comprehensive-land-
use-plan#.VTAtaGXD9aQ. 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO 2012) Societal security - Business continuity 
management systems  Requirements, ISO 22301:2012, International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO), Geneva, Switzerland. 
National Science and Technology Council (2005) Grand Challenges for Disaster Reduction  A Report of 
the Subcommittee on Disaster Reduction, National Science and Technology Council, Executive Office of 
the President, Washington, DC. 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 2013) NFPA 1600: Standard on Disaster/Emergency 
Management and Business Continuity Programs, 2013 Edition, National Fire Protection Association 
(NFPA), Quincy, MA. 
PPD-21 (2013) Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-21, The White House, February 12, 2013, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/02/12/presidential-policy-directive-critical-
infrastructure-security-and-resil. 
PPD-8 (2011) Presidential Policy Directive, PPD-8  National Preparedness, The White House, March 
30, 2011, http://www.dhs.gov/presidential-policy-directive-8-national-preparedness. 
Schuller, T.; S. Baron; and J. Field (2000) Social Capital: A Review and Critique. Social Capital: 
Critical Perspectives, edited by Stephen Baron, John Field, and Tom Schuller, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, pp. 1-38. 
106 
 
Glossary 
List of Acronyms 
Acronym Definition 
100RC 100 Resilient Cities 
AAR After Action Report 
AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
AC Advisory Circular 
ACI American Concrete Institute 
AEP Airport Emergency Plan 
AES Automatic Extinguishing System 
AIA American Institute of Architects 
AISC American Institute of Steel Construction 
ALA American Lifelines Association 
ANSI American National Standards Institute 
APA American Planning Association 
APPA American Public Power Association 
AREMA American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association 
ASCE American Society of Civil Engineers 
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials 
ATC Applied Technology Council 
AWWA American Water Works Association 
BART Bay Area Rapid Transit 
BPS Bulk Power System 
BRIC Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities 
BSI British Standards Institute 
CAIDI Customer Average Interruption Duration Index 
107 
 
Glossary 
Acronym Definition 
CAIFI Customer Average Interruption Duration Index 
CaLEAP California Energy Assurance Planning 
CAMV Covered Aerial Medium Voltage 
CARRI Community and Regional Resilience Institute 
CART Communities Advancing Resilience Toolkit 
CATV Cable Television 
CCSF City and County of San Francisco 
CEI Critical Energy Infrastructure 
CIP Capital Improvement Plan 
CHP Combined Heat and Power 
CSA Community Service Area 
COLTs Cell on Light Trucks 
CPG Comprehensive Preparedness Guide 
CRF Community Resilience Framework 
CRI Coastal Community Resilience Index 
CRS Community Rating System 
CSO Community Service Organization 
CSRIC Communications Security, Reliability, and Interoperability Council 
DLC RT Digital Loop Carrier Remote Terminal 
DLR Dynamic Line Rating 
DOB Department of Buildings 
DOC  Department of Commerce  
DoD Department of Defense 
DOE Department of Energy 
DOGAMI Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries 
108 
 
Glossary 
Acronym Definition 
DOT Department of Transportation 
DR Demand Response 
DSM Demand Side Management 
EA Environmental Assessment 
EAS Emergency Alert System 
EBMUD East Bay Municipal Utility District 
EE Energy Efficiency 
EF Enhanced Fujita (scale) 
EIA Energy Information Administration 
EIM Energy Imbalance Markets 
EIS Environmental Impact Statement 
EMS Emergency Medical Services 
EOC Emergency Operations Center 
EOP Executive Office of the President 
EPCRA Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act 
EPA Environmental Protection Agency 
EPFAT Emergency Power Facility Assessment Tool 
EPRI Electric Power Research Institute 
ERO Electric Reliability Organization 
FAA Federal Aviation Administration 
FCC Federal Communications Commission 
FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency 
FERC Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
FHWA Federal Highway Administration 
FRA Federal Railroad Administration 
109 
 
Glossary 
Acronym Definition 
FTA Federal Transit Administration 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GETS Government Emergency Telecommunications Service 
GIS Geographic Information System 
GTAA Greater Toronto Airports Authority 
HAZMAT Hazardous Materials 
HVAC Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning 
IA Iowa 
IBC International Building Code 
IBHS Institute for Business and Home Safety 
ICC International Code Council 
ICLEI Local Governments for Sustainability 
IEBC International Existing Building Code 
IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
IOU Investor-Owned Utility 
IPAWS Integrated Public Alert and Warning System 
IPP Independent Power Producer 
IRC International Residential Code 
ISO International Organization for Standardization 
ISP Internet Service Provider 
ITS Intelligent Transportation Systems 
IWUIC International Wildland-Urban Interface Code 
IXP Internet Exchange Points 
LADWP Los Angeles Department of Water and Power 
LAWA Los Angeles World Airports 
110 
 
Glossary 
Acronym Definition 
LRFD Load Factor and Resistance Design 
MAP-21 Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21 Century Act 
MARAD  Maritime Administration 
MCEER Multidisciplinary Center for Earthquake Engineering Reduction 
MSC Mobile Switching Center 
MPO Metropolitan Planning Organization 
MRE Manual for Railway Engineering 
NAPSR National Association of Pipeline Safety Representatives 
NARUC National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners 
NASEO National Association of State Energy Officials 
NCHRP National Cooperative Highway Research Program 
NDRF National Disaster Recovery Framework 
NEBS Network Equipment Building Standards 
NEC National Electric Code 
NEPA National Environmental Protection Act 
NERC North American Electric Reliability Corporation 
NESC National Electric Safety Code 
NFIP National Flood Insurance Program 
NFPA National Fire Protection Association 
NGO Nongovernment Organization 
NHSRC National Homeland Security Research Center  
NIBS National Institute of Building Sciences 
NIPP National Infrastructure Protection Plan 
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology 
NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
111 
 
Glossary 
Acronym Definition 
NPG National Preparedness Goal 
NRC Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
NRECA National Rural Electric Cooperative Association 
NWS National Weather Service 
NYCC New York Panel on Climate Change 
NYCDEP New York City Department of Environmental Protection 
NYSERDA New York State Energy Research and Development Authority 
OCDI Overseas Coastal Area Development Institute of Japan 
OSSPAC Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission 
PANYNJ Port Authority of New York and New Jersey 
PARRE Program for Risk and Resiliency Evaluation 
PDM Pre-Disaster Mitigation 
PEP Private Entry Point 
PHMSA Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Administration 
PIANC World Association for Waterborne Transport Infrastructure 
PIEVC Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee 
PMU Phasor Measurement Unit 
POTS Plain Old Telephone Service 
PPD-8 Presidential Policy Directive 8 
PPD-21 Presidential Policy Directive 21 
PSAP Public-Safety Answering Point 
PSEG Public Service Enterprise Group 
PV Photovoltaic 
ROW Right of Way 
RPS Renewable Portfolio Standards 
112 
 
Glossary 
Acronym Definition 
RUS Rural Utilities Service 
SAFETEA-LU Safe Accountable Flexible Efficient Transportation Equity Act 
SAIDI System Average Interruption Duration Index 
SAIFI System Average Interruption Frequency Index 
SCADA Supervisory Control Data Acquisition 
SDWA Safe Drinking Water Act 
SEI Structural Engineering Institute 
SFPUC San Francisco Public Utilities Commission 
SGIP Smart Grid Interoperability Panel 
SLOSH Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from Hurricanes 
SLR Sea Level Rise 
SPUR San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association 
SSO Standards Setting Organizations 
THIRA Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment 
TIA Telecommunications Industry Association 
TRB Transportation Research Board 
TSP Telecommunications Service Priority 
TVA Tennessee Valley Authority 
UFC United Facilities Criteria 
UN United Nations 
UNIDSR United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction 
UPS Uninterruptible Power Supply 
URI Utility Resilience Index 
US  
USA  of America 
113 
 
Glossary 
Acronym Definition 
USACE  Army Corps of Engineers 
USGC  Coast Guard 
VOAD Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster 
VSAT Vulnerability Self-Assessment Tool 
WARN Water/Wastewater Agency Response Network 
WEA Wireless Emergency Alerts 
WHEAT Water Health and Economic Analysis Tool 
WPS Wireless Priority Service 
WWTP Wastewater Treatment Plant 
 
114 

This publication is available free of charge from:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1190v2  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
    
       

9 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Introduction 
10.1. Introduction  
Achieving community resilience is a social process. This Guide gives communities a methodology to plan 
for resilience by prioritizing buildings and infrastructure systems based on their importance in supporting 
the social and economic functions in the community. Figure 10-1 illustrates this concept. 
 
Figure 10-1: The social and economic functions of a community define the functional requirements of 
the communitys buildings and infrastructure systems. 
The Guide describes a six-step process communities can follow to increase community resilience. The 
first step is forming a collaborative planning team (see Chapter 2 of Volume I). Therefore, Section 10.2 
discusses the importance of community engagement when planning for resilience. In the second step, the 
planning team, which includes community leaders, characterizes the social dimensions of the community 
 i.e., the social and economic functions of a community that are in place to meet community member 
needs (see Chapter 3 of Volume I). This chapter provides context and tools to guide the planning team in 
characterizing the social community. The steps to characterize the social community are: 
1. Characterize community members and their needs (current and future). This process includes 
identifying community population demographics and their geographic locations within the 
community, social vulnerabilities and inequities within the population, the needs of community 
members, and the communitys economic profile. Additionally, the community should project the 
long-term growth/needs of community members. 
2. Identify social institutions/systems within the community, including their functions, the needs 
they meet, and any gaps in capacity that can be reduced by a change/improvement to the built 
environment.  
3. Identify any dependencies among and within social institutions. 
4. Identify key social- and economic-based community metrics; i.e., methods of tracking success of 
planning efforts and improvements made to achieve community resilience. 
Once both the social and built communities are characterized, it is important that the planning team 
identify the dependencies of the social institutions on the built environment (discussed in Section 10.7). 
This chapter ends by offering examples of resilience goals communities might set for their social 
institutions that can be used to develop performance goals for the built environment (Section 10.8 and 
Chapter 4 of Volume I). 
10 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Social Capital and Community Engagement 
10.2. Social Capital and Community Engagement 
The report, Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative, highlights the need for a paradigm shift in the 
 to a new culture of disaster resilience [The National Academies 2012]. In this report, 
social capital is included among other social factors such as health and socioeconomic status, that 
influence a communitys ability to prepare for, respond to, and recover from disaster. Since 2006, 
published research on the importance of social capital in disaster resilience has increased dramatically 
[Aldrich and Meyer 2014; Ritchie and Gill 2007].  
The term social capital refers to social networks, the reciprocity and trust generated by them among 
individuals, groups, and communities, and the value of these social networks for achieving mutual goals 
[Schuller, Baron, and Field 2000]. Similar to cultural capital, social capital reflects the convergence of 
shared values in a community. It is especially valuable because it enhances a communitys ability to work 
toward collective goalsmany of which include an increase in other forms of capital. As Putnam [2000] 
notes, social capital greases the wheels that allow communities to advance smoothly. At the most basic 
level, social capital facilitates information sharing, serves as a conduit for providing social support, and 
enhances the capacity for collective action. Recently, the importance of social capital has been 
demonstrated in hazard and disaster research. 
Social capital can contribute to resilience by enhancing the sense of belonging and strengthening bonds 
between individuals and groups within communities. This potential increases when civic engagement 
involves multiple and diverse sets of stakeholders. As noted in the 2012 National Academies report, 
Building resilience in the face of disaster risk can also have benefits for a community even in the 
absence of a disaster in advancing social capital for dealing with more mundane community challenges 
[The National Academies 2012]. 
Community engagement is an important aspect of a communitys social capital. It is important that the 
planning team identify and actively engage with individuals in the community planning process who 
represent the diverse views and needs within the community. People live, work, learn, and play within a 
community and, therefore, need to have a voice in the communitys planning process. Communities may 
wish to invite individuals who are already actively engaged in other community-based activities, not 
necessarily related to resilience. In addition, communities may wish to identify individuals who are highly 
connected and engaged with neighborhood, business, or community groups. These individuals can help 
represent particular group perspectives/interests that become important as resilience improvements are 
proposed through the planning process.  
For communities to become engaged in the pursuit of resilience, there needs to be a collective belief in 
the potential threat from hazard(s) and the value of investing in resilience. These beliefs and values also 
reflect the level of risk a community is willing to tolerate. This level of risk is usually based on experience 
and available science. Communities rely on science and engineering to present hazard probabilities and 
design options for reducing or avoiding exposure to community hazards. Scientists, engineers, and 
decision makers need to have a common understanding of purpose, roles, responsibilities, and limitations 
as they relate to potential disasters and the means to plan, detect, notify, and respond to threats.  
By going through the resilience planning process, communities can better understand how their decisions 
result in an increased or decreased level of risk from potential hazards. They can also identify 
opportunities to reduce future losses through mitigation and recovery strategies. Ideally, resilience 
planning will help communities demonstrate credible investments toward improved quality of life during 
and after design-level hazards. Planning can support expedited recovery following extreme hazard events 
and take advantage of recovery and reconstruction opportunities.  
11 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Community Members and Their Needs (Now and 
in the Future) 
10.3. Community Members and Their Needs (Now and in the Future) 
The Community & Regional Resilience Institutes (CARRI) Community Resilience System (CRS) 
[CARRI 2013] equates characterizing the social community to defining the communitys identity. 
Characterization involves: 
x Analyzing existing data, or possibly collecting data, on community demographics and their 
geographic locations, and economic indicators 
x Identifying social assets, capacities (i.e., social capital), vulnerabilities, and inequities within the 
population 
x Recognizing the needs of different groups in the community 
Since resilience involves long-term planning and decision-making, community leaders could begin by 
identifying the ways in which community demographics, capacities, vulnerabilities, and specific local 
needs may change over time. 
A populations identity, from a social perspective, may differ greatly from one community to another. It is 
important that a community examine data on the demographics of their community members, including 
age, education, gender, income, ethnicity, employment rates, rates of insurance coverage, special needs 
groups, and other important variables. Much of these data are available without cost from federal 
agencies, e.g., U.S. Census Bureau [2015], but locally-specific data can also be collected via surveys, 
questionnaires or interviews or focus groups with community members. Data should also be used to 
create a business or industry profile of the community, e.g., the percentage of the communitys economy 
occupied by each type of industry. By understanding these aspects of their community, community 
leaders can begin to identify local capacities, as well as social vulnerabilities, and in turn, the specific 
needs of community members. 
10.3.1. Social Vulnerabilities  
When assessing a communitys population, it is important to recognize and address social vulnerability. 
Not all people use community systems or have access to community systems in the same ways. Therefore, 
the needs of everyone likely to be affected in a disaster (or on a day-to-day basis)  such as older adults, 
people living in poverty, racial and ethnic minority groups, people with disabilities, and those suffering 
from chronic illness  may not be met. In addition, renters, students, single-parent families, small 
business owners, culturally diverse groups, and residents of historic neighborhoods may not be adequately 
represented [Phillips et al. 2009]. Therefore, interactions of individuals/households with community 
systems can introduce inequities among certain subpopulations of a community.  
These inequities tend to worsen in and following a hazard event. Specifically, a large and growing body 
of empirical research on hazards and disasters shows that risk is not distributed or shared equally across 
all groups [Bullard and Wright 2009; Phillips et al. 2009; Tierney 2014; The National Academies 2012; 
The Institute of Medicine 2015]. Pre-disaster vulnerability, inherent in social institutions, may negatively 
impact response, recovery, and resilience following a disaster event. For example, some individuals and 
groups face greater risks than others based upon where they are located in the community, the buildings in 
which they live or work (e.g., inferior housing), or having to rely only on public transportation. These 
groups are also less likely to be included in the political process, and often have little voice in disaster 
planning, response, and recovery activities. 
Vulnerability is highlighted here to ensure all community members and their resources (or lack of 
resources) are considered when planning for resilience. Community leaders should identify those 
populations who are most affected  not only in and after a disaster, but also on a day-to-day basis  to 
make resilience-based decisions that improve the life-safety and well-being of all community members. 
12 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Community Members and Their Needs (Now and 
in the Future) 
Communities can assess their social vulnerability using a variety of tools, including the Social 
Vulnerability Index [University of South Carolina 2013]. Further information on vulnerable populations 
is available in Phillips et al. [2009] and Tierney [2014].  
10.3.2. Needs of Community Members 
Individuals and households in any community 
have a set of needs they strive to meet on a daily 
basis. Figure 10-2 presents a generalized 
hierarchy of individual and household needs, 
which may require further adaptation and Growth
specification by each community. The figure &
shows the most fundamental needs at the bottom Achievement
(survival), followed by safety and security, Achievement, recognition, 
belonging, and growth and achievement needs fulfillment
[Maslow 1943]. While all needs are important, the Belonging
hierarchy shows that some needs are more urgent 
or time sensitive than others, a concept that is Family/friends/neighborhood
particularly useful in the context of recovery and Safety and Security
resilience. Although there are more detailed 
conceptual models that discuss human needs [e.g., Law and order, stability, employment, health
see Max-Neef, Elizalde, and Hopenhayn 1991], Survival
this approach  adapted from Maslows Hierarchy Life, food, water, shelter, clothing
of Needs  captures the most essential dimensions  
with which this chapter is concerned.  Figure 10-2: The hierarchy of human needs 
The first and most fundamental need is that of (Adapted from Maslows Hierarchy of Needs  a 
survival. Survival includes necessary physical psychological perspective [Maslow 1943]) 
requirements, such as air, water, food, shelter, and 
clothing. If these needs are not met, the human body cannot sustain life  people cannot live longer than 5 
days without water and 6 weeks without food, assuming an adequate water supply [Lieberson 2004]. 
Survival also includes protection of life from hazard events. 
The second need, safety and security, includes all aspects of personal, financial (economic) security, and 
health and well-being. People require safety and security in their personal lives from situations of 
violence, physical and verbal abuse, war, etc. They also must know their families and friendship networks 
are secure. Individuals need financial safety (e.g., job security, a consistent income, savings accounts, 
insurance policies, and other types of financial safety nets). Studies of disasters during the recovery phase 
[Dickenson 2013; Binder 2014] show that people are likely to relocate to another community in search of 
new employment [Sanders et al. 2003; Fraser et al. 2006; Hunter 2005] or economic gain, such as higher 
wages [Belcher and Bates 1983], or because they lost access to their non-liquid assets, such as farm land 
or fishing boats [Black et al. 2008; Gray et al. 2009]. These studies emphasize the importance of 
providing employment and financial security to those within a community. Finally, people require safety 
from negative health conditions, so they can enjoy life and consistent well-being in their communities. 
The third need is belonging. This need represents belonging and acceptance among various groups of 
people (e.g., family, friends, school groups, sports teams, work colleagues, religious congregation) or 
belonging to a place or location. In relation to groups of people, experts often discuss the concept of 
social capital within a community. Social capital describes the networks and relationships that connect 
members of a community, including the extensiveness and interconnectedness of social networks within 
the community, levels of civic engagement, and interpersonal, inter-organizational, and institutional trust 
13 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Social Institutions within the Community 
[The National Academies 2006; Aldrich and Meyer 2014]. The importance of a sense of belonging within 
a community has been demonstrated by research into community recovery, which shows that the 
likelihood of people leaving a community increases when social networks are lost [Sanders et al. 2003]. 
Research also demonstrates that individuals benefit from a strong sense of belonging to a place, which 
inhibits their desire to relocate after a hazard event [Groen and Polivka 2010; Cutter et al. 2014]. A strong 
place attachment or sense of belonging to a place can be influenced by, for example, home ownership or 
having strong, extensive social networks within the community.  
The fourth need is growth and achievement. Humans need to feel a sense of achievement and that they are 
respected in society. In Figure 10-2, this need is accompanied by continual growth and exploration within 
society, including an individuals ability to realize his/her full potential  to accomplish all that he/she can 
 within his/her lifetime. Although this need may seem less tangible than others, growth and achievement 
are as important as other needs, often being accomplished through educational achievement and 
participation in arts and recreation.  
Maslows hierarchy, supported by research studies of hazard event recovery, identifies the functions that 
must be maintained in a resilient community [Arup 2014]. For example, based on the hierarchy of needs, 
a resilient community:  
x Safeguards human life 
x Delivers basic needs 
x Provides safety and security from a personal, financial, and health/well-being perspective 
x Facilitates human relationships and identification (with groups and to a place) 
x Supports growth and achievement 
However, all communities are different and meet these needs in different ways through their social 
institutions.  
10.4. Social Institutions within the Community 
Characterizing the social community also involves identifying the social institutions, including their 
functions, the needs they meet, and any gaps in capacity that can be remedied by a change or 
improvement to the built environment. A social institution is a complex, organized pattern of beliefs and 
behaviors and can include family, education, government, religion, economy, each of which is 
overlapping and interdependent. The purpose of social institutions is to meet the basic individual and 
household needs.  
This section describes eight social institutions to guide communities in understanding their own set of 
social institutions. Sections 10.4.1 through 10.4.8 summarize the socially-based purposes and functions 
each institution serves in communities, as well as the human needs they meet in the context of Maslows 
hierarchy. The eight institutions described in this chapter include: 
1. Family and Kinship 
2. Economic (i.e., business and commerce) 
3. Government  
4. Health  
5. Education 
6. Community Service Organizations 
14 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Social Institutions within the Community 
7. Religious, Cultural, and Other Organizations that Support Belief Systems 
8. Media 
Although ad hoc groups can form both within and outside of these social institutions after a hazard event, 
this section presents the ways a community is typically organized for its day-to-day functions. 
10.4.1. Family and Kinship 
Family is the first institution to which we are exposed. Within a family, an individual can learn about the 
world and the importance of love, care, and a sense of belonging. The family unit is typically defined as 
a relationship between two or more people who are related by birth, marriage, or adoption. However, it 
is difficult to define fully what is meant by the term family, since our understanding varies across 
cultures and over time. We might consider only those within our family of origin as part of our family 
unit, even limiting the family unit to those living in the same residence [Nam 2004]. More often, 
however, our definition of family broadens to include extended family members (e.g., grandparents, 
aunts, uncles, and cousins), or even long-time friends, friends of family, or other individuals who are not 
related by blood or marriage. Tight, close-knit bonds are developed within family/kinship units that, 
among other factors, can determine a communitys level of resilience in response to a hazard event. 
Proximity of family members to one another is also an important consideration. Family members may 
live within the same residence or different residences within the same community, providing larger 
numbers of close-knit groups within a community to respond and recover from an event. In other cases, 
family members may live in different geographical parts of the world. While such distance may decrease 
the opportunity for social capital, it provides additional sheltering options to family members who wish to 
evacuate a community that has been disrupted by a hazard event, either temporarily or permanently.  
Family or kinship units exist to support all human needs in Maslows hierarchy, from very basic needs to 
the need for growth and achievement. The family or kinship unit is responsible for providing support and 
resources to meet survival, safety/security, belonging/acceptance, and growth/achievement needs. 
10.4.2. Economic 
Economic institutions facilitate allocation of scarce resources across society. Producers and suppliers 
combine factors of production (e.g., land, labor, and capital) to create goods and services that meet the 
needs and desires of consumers. The availability of production factors, along with the demand of 
consumers, determines the final mix of goods and services produced, supplied, and consumed.  
The economy is a mechanism by which most human needs are satisfied. While not all needs are provided 
for, the economy produces goods and services that fulfill some element of survival, safety and security, 
belonging, and growth and achievement from Maslows hierarchy. Some needs are met through the direct 
consumption of goods and services, such as food and shelter. Other needs are satisfied as a result of a 
functioning economy. For example, employment affords individuals the means to provide, but also can 
afford opportunities for career growth and achievement. Further, many commercial and for-profit venues, 
such as shopping malls, barbershops, and restaurants, facilitate the social gatherings of individuals with 
shared interests and life experiences, providing people with a sense of belonging. It is obvious then, that 
the pursuit of economic interests also creates values that have no market; yet, it is also vulnerable to 
disruptive events.  
Good Production and Service Supply. Industries within the economy are classified by their production or 
supply role. Three economic sectors exist:  
15 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Social Institutions within the Community 
x Primary Economic Sector  Producers of raw materials, such as the agriculture, forestry, fishing, 
and mining industries. In 2011, these industries represented 3.9 % of U.S. gross domestic 
product.1 
x Secondary Economic Sector  Producers of goods, such as the manufacturing and construction 
industries. In 2011, these industries represented 15.8 % of U.S. gross domestic product. 
x Tertiary Economic Sector  Suppliers of services, such as utilities, wholesale and retail trade, 
transportation and warehousing, information, financial activities, professional and business 
services, education services, health care and social assistance, leisure and hospitality, other 
services, and federal, state, and local government. In 2011, these industries represented 80.3 % of 
U.S. gross domestic product. 
Labor Supply. Of the 316 million people in the U.S. reported by the U.S. Census Bureaus 2013 
Population Estimates, approximately 144 million were employed (Table 10-1). According to the 2013 
American Community Survey, 96.3 % of employees worked in their state of residence; however 23.8 % 
worked outside their county of residence [ Census Bureau 2015]. For some communities 
(located within a county), an even larger percentage of employees may work outside their communities 
jurisdictional boundaries. Therefore, it is likely that a hazard event that affects a particular community 
will not affect the communitys entire workforce.  
Around 11 million persons, aged 16 and over, were unemployed (Table 10-1). Industries that have low 
unemployment and/or require highly trained and skilled employees, might find it difficult to handle a 
disruption from a hazard event that displaces their employees.  
Consumer Demand. In 2013, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Income and 
Product Accounts Tables on Gross Domestic Product, personal consumption expenditures amounted to 
$11.5 trillion or 68 % of GDP, investment amounted to $2.6 trillion (16 % of GDP), government 
consumption amounted to $3.1 trillion (19 % of GDP), and net exports were -$508.2 billion [Bureau of 
Economic Analysis 2013]. As seen in Table 10-2, approximately a third of personal consumption 
expenditures went toward goods, while the rest went towards services. Consumers purchase and use 
goods and services from vendors within their community, while away on business or vacation (tourism), 
and online. 
A hazard event may affect consumer demand. Those sectors that serve tourism may experience a decrease 
in consumption expenditures. Additionally, the economy might see an increased demand in the 
construction industry, if a significant number of commercial or residential buildings require repair or a 
rebuild. 
10.4.3. Government 
Laws, regulations, and services provided by the government protect life and property, preserve peace and 
well-being, strengthen group identity and norms, and define social and economic goals for the future. In 
response to a disruptive event, for example, the government may provide for many of Maslows needs, 
starting with the necessities of food, water, and shelter and extending through safety and security. (See 
Section 1.6 in Volume 1, Other Federal Activities Supporting Resilience, for a broader discussion of 
current federal programs that support community resilience.) However, the governmental entity providing 
service may shift following a hazard event to support recovery from federal to local (or vice versa), or 
even necessitate change from private to public, for example. Such shifts could alter local reliance on the 
built environment.  
                                                      
1 Gross domestic product (GDP) is the market value of goods and services produced by labor and capital in a country. In 2011, 
U.S. GDP measured $15.5 trillion (Bureau of Economic Analysis 2013) 
16 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Social Institutions within the Community 
Table 10-1: U.S. employment characteristics, 2013 [Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics 2015] 
  Employed Unemployed Average Average Hourly 
(Thousands) (Thousands) Weekly Earnings 
Hours (Dollars) 
Agriculture and related 2 130 141 - - 
Mining, quarrying, and oil and gas extraction 1 065 64 43.90 29.73 
Construction 9 271 935 39.00 26.12 
Manufacturing 14 869 1 019 40.80 24.35 
Wholesale and retail trade 19 653 1 463 35.05* 22.13* 
Transportation and utilities 7 415 406 40.45 ** 28.77 ** 
Information 2 960 175 36.70 32.90 
Financial activities 9 849 424 37.10 30.15 
Professional and business services 16 793 1 284 36.10 28.52 
Education and health services 32 535 1 098 32.70 24.44 
Leisure and hospitality 13 554 1 379 26.00 13.50 
Other services 7 127 445 31.70 21.40 
Public administration/government 6 708 851 - - 
Self-employed, family, and other  - 1 774 - - 
Total 143 929 11 458 - - 
* Average of wholesale trade and retail trade   ** Average of transportation/warehousing and utilities 
17 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Social Institutions within the Community 
Table 10-2: Consumption expenditures as a percent of total, by type of product [Source: Bureau of 
Economic Analysis 2013] 
Goods 34% Services 66% 
x Durable goods: 11% x Household consumption: 64% 
Motor vehicles and parts 4% Housing and utilities 18% 
Furnishings and household equipment 2% Health care 17% 
Recreational goods and vehicles 3% Transportation services 3% 
Other durable goods 2% Recreation services 4% 
x Nondurable goods: 23% Food services and accommodations 6% 
Food and beverages (off-premises) 8% Financial services and insurance 7% 
Clothing and footwear 3% Other services 9% 
Gasoline and other energy goods 4% x Consumption expenditures of nonprofit 3% 
institutions serving households 
Other nondurable goods 8% 
Local governments, which are the focus of this Guide, are made up of general and specific purpose 
entities, and vary in terms of autonomy. For instance, some communities have complete autonomy to 
adopt codes and develop statutes, while others are restricted by state regulations. General purpose entities 
include county, municipal, and township governments. Specific purpose entities are more singular in 
function (e.g., school districts). In 2012, there were 90,059 local governments, with 43 % serving a 
general purpose [Hogue 2013].  
Community Development. Community development is a major issue for local communities, as local 
governments strive for a vibrant and thriving economy. Community development largely consists of 
attracting and retaining businesses and jobs, enhancing local amenities, addressing poverty and inequity, 
and maintaining the quality of the local environment. Often communities hope that improving local 
amenities will indirectly attract and retain businesses and jobs. Providing local services, such as schools, 
roads and public safety, is a core function of local governments. Public safety and roads directly impact 
the resilience of a community in the face of hazards. Quality schools serve as an amenity that can attract 
jobs and businesses. Communities that cannot attract and retain businesses and jobs tend to fare more 
poorly after hazard events than communities that can do so.  
For most cities, local revenue sources consist of some combination of property and sales tax. A sales tax 
revenue base is maintained by attracting commercial businesses and jobs. The property tax revenue base 
is dependent on property values, which can be supported by improving disaster resilience, since disaster 
risk is negatively correlated with home sale prices [Gilbert 2010]. 
Poverty. Poverty is also a major concern for local communities. Many projects communities pursue are 
aimed at decreasing poverty in their neighborhoods; and many external funding sources available to 
communities are aimed at alleviating poverty. These issues intersect with disaster resilience in that the 
disadvantaged are often most vulnerable to the consequences of hazard events. Improving resilience often 
starts with protecting the disadvantaged. 
18 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Social Institutions within the Community 
Environmental Stewardship. Local governments are often interested in ensuring their communities are 
good environmental stewards by protecting and improving their environments. Being green and 
maintaining a small ecological footprint are important to many local communities. In turn, these efforts 
can impact community resilience (see Chapter 17).  
10.4.4. Health 
Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of 
disease or infirmity [World Health Organization 1948]. There are differences in the unit (or level) of 
health care. Public health focuses on health at the community level, whereas health care services typically 
are provided to individuals and families within a community. This section discusses both levels of health 
services. 
Public health involves the actions taken, as a society, to collectively  assure the conditions in which 
people can be healthy [Division of Health Care Services, Institute of Medicine 1998; Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention 2014]. Overall, the goals of public health are to: 1) prevent epidemics and the 
spread of disease, 2) protect people from environmental hazards, 3) prevent injury, 4) promote and 
encourage healthy behavior, 5) assist communities in disaster response and recovery, and 6) assure quality 
and accessible health services. The public health system provides many essential services, including: 
monitoring health status of a community, informing and educating individuals on health risks and 
protective behaviors, developing policies and plans to promote healthier communities, enforcing laws and 
regulations, fostering community partnerships, evaluating current health services, and conduct research.  
Public health departments exist at the federal, state, local and tribal levels. This chapter addresses the 
local and tribal health departments. In some places, local health departments exist as an entity within the 
local government, and may make most of the decisions for community public health. However, in other 
places, local health departments are led by state governments or governed by both state and local 
authorities. Frequent activities engaged in by local health departments include immunization provisions, 
infectious disease surveillance, tuberculosis screening, food service establishment inspection, and food 
safety education, some of which may become increasingly important after a hazard event occurs.  
At the individual or family level, health care services promote, monitor, maintain, and restore health. 
According to the World Health Organization, regardless of how they are organized, all health systems 
need to address six basic functions: 1) provide health services; 2) develop health workers; 3) develop a 
functioning health information system; 4) provide equitable access to essential medical products, 
vaccines, and technologies; 5) mobilize and allocate finances; and 6) ensure leadership and governance 
[World Health Organization 2007]. 
The health care institution primarily meets the survival, and safety and security needs of Maslows 
hierarchy. However, a community may consider that, through obtaining a higher level of well-being for 
its members, a strong community-based health care system can assist with the need for belonging as well 
as growth and achievement. 
Health care systems consist of a complex and diverse set of players. Many individuals and organizations 
are involved in the health care system, including educational and research institutions, medical suppliers, 
insurers, health care providers, payers (e.g., commercial insurers and employers), claims processers, and 
regulators, and policy makers [Shi and Singh 2008]. Within the health care system, many of these groups 
can fall under other institutions that are discussed in this section, including education, the economy, and 
government.  
The different types of services delivered by health care providers within a community, however, are 
unique to the healthcare institution [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2014; Association for 
Prevention Teaching and Research 2015]:  
19 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Social Institutions within the Community 
x Preventative care. Aims to prevent future injury or illness, including blood pressure screening, 
diabetes and cholesterol tests, cancer screenings, counseling on topics such as quitting smoking or 
losing weight, routine vaccinations, counseling, screening and vaccinations to ensure healthy 
pregnancies, and flu shots [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2015] 
x Primary care. Provides integrated health care services aimed at providing the patient with a broad 
spectrum of preventative and curative care over a period of time [MedicineNet.com 2015] 
x Specialized care. Provides specialized care by physicians trained in a particular field (e.g., 
neurology, cardiology, dermatology, etc.), usually upon referral from primary care [Johns 
Hopkins Medicine 2015] 
x Chronic or long-term care. Addresses pre-existing or long-term illness  
x Sub-acute care. Provides care for patients who do not require hospital care (acute care), yet need 
more intensive skilled nursing care [California Department of Health Care Services 2014] 
x Acute care. Addresses short-term or severe illness with a shorter timeframe (i.e., emergency care) 
x Rehabilitative care. Aids a person in restoring lost skills or function from an injury or illness 
(physical or mental) 
x End-of-life care. Provides care for those facing a life-limiting illness or injury 
x Mental or behavioral health care. Treats health conditions that are characterized by alterations 
in thinking, mood, or behavior (or some combination thereof) associated with distress and/or 
impaired functioning [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 1999] including 
treatment for addiction/substance abuse 
x Home health care. Provides a wide variety of services for illness and injury that can be given to 
individuals within their home. 
Elements of each of these services can include prescribing medication to patients, highlighting the 
increasing importance of pharmacy services and staff, which also provide individual care in many cases, 
and the provision of durable medical equipment.  
The urgency of care is one important difference among all health care services. Some services, for 
example, acute and chronic or long-term care (i.e., assisted living facilities, nursing homes, adult homes), 
provide patients with critical, life-saving care on a day-to-day basis. Each community should assess health 
care services provided to its members, with an understanding that a hazard event may affect the demands 
and provision of services for injuries and emotional trauma of residents and the labor force, and assign 
priority to those services rated as most critical.  
10.4.5. Education 
Education is the primary social institution dedicated to the transfer of knowledge, skills, and values from 
one individual or group to another. Typically, when one thinks of education, formal education comes to 
mind. Formal education can begin in nursery school, and continues through primary and secondary 
school, often referred to as elementary, middle, and high schools. This education may take place in 
public, private, or home school settings. Formal education also includes higher education in colleges and 
universities.  
Knowledge, skills, and values transfer in other ways within the education institution, including adult 
education (or continuing education), special education, and informal education. Adult education ranges 
from basic literacy to personal fulfillment (e.g., culinary or language classes) to attainment of an 
advanced degree [About Education 2015]. Special education provides specifically-designed instruction 
20 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Social Institutions within the Community 
to meet the unique needs of a child (or adult) with a disability [U.S. Department of Education 2004]. 
Finally, informal education can include any other means of knowledge, skills, or value transfer, including 
visiting museums, reading books, attending book clubs, or participating in recreational classes or 
demonstrations.  
The functions of the educational institution described in this section focus on the day-to-day. After a 
disruptive event, the educational institution within a community provides a venue to educate the public 
about current hazards the community faces. Additionally, the education institution can provide a support 
system for the students and their teachers to regain a sense of normalcy after an event occurs. 
The educational institution primarily meets the growth and achievement needs of Maslows hierarchy. 
However, participating in any of the forms of education, described in the preceding paragraphs, satisfies 
an individuals need for belonging. Additionally, formal educational institutions often provide meals to 
children in nursery, primary, and secondary schools, meeting the survival need. 
10.4.6. Community Service Organizations 
Community service organizations (CSOs) are non-profit and non-governmental entities of varying sizes 
and missions that provide services to individuals around the U.S. While CSOs, such as the Red Cross and 
the Salvation Army, are active in response and recovery efforts, this section also considers organizations 
that do not have such a focus as part of their mission. Such organizations may take on such roles after a 
hazard event. Generally speaking, these organizations tend to operate at a local level, often relying on 
volunteers to support minimal full-time staff. CSOs typically focus on human services, natural 
environment conservation or restoration, and urban safety and revitalization [PBWorks 2015]. CSOs may 
assist individuals in meeting basic needs, such as shelter, food, and clothing, as well as provide emotional 
and mental health support. They may also enhance the overall quality of life in a community by engaging 
in work related to neighborhood revitalization, affordable housing, food security, accessible 
transportation, senior citizens associations, community sustainability, humanitarian response, medical 
relief funds, after school programs, youth homes and centers, skill building and education, and civic 
engagement.  
During and after a disruptive event, the role of CSOs, particularly those that provide essential services, 
becomes even more critical. As noted by Ritchie et al. [2008] in a comprehensive study of preparedness 
among community-based organizations: 
After major disasters, frail elderly people living alone still will need meals and other 
services; low-income disaster victims will need assistance from community clinics; 
services for people with AIDS and for those with chronic mental illness will need to 
remain operational; and immigrants still will need aid and support from the same 
organizations that provide assistance during non-disaster times. 
In many cases, demands for the types of assistance provided by CSOs increase substantially following a 
disaster, as more people seek assistance. In post-disaster contexts, CSOs of almost any type may adapt 
and expand their roles and services to support community disaster response and recovery efforts.  
Apart from organizations that provide essential services, CSOs such as civic, social, and recreational 
clubs (e.g., Rotary Clubs, Boys and Girls Clubs, after school programs) become increasingly important in 
community recovery processes by providing opportunities and physical settings to draw upon, maintain, 
and to build social capital. For example, buildings that house CSOs may provide a place for recovery 
planning. This consideration is important with respect to understanding the needs of CSOs as related to 
the built environment in terms of broader community resilience. 
With respect to Maslows hierarchy, CSOs address human needs related to survival, safety and security, 
belonging, and growth and achievement. The nature of the needs met by any given CSO depends on its 
21 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Social Institutions within the Community 
mission and the people it serves. In many cases, CSOs fulfill daily needs of survival, safety and security, 
belonging, and growth and achievement for older adults, people living in poverty, racial and ethnic 
minority groups, people with disabilities, and those suffering from chronic debilitating illness. These 
needs may not otherwise be met by traditional family and kinship groups. Other types of CSOs, such as 
civic, social, and recreational clubs are more likely to address, on a regular basis, the needs associated 
with belonging and growth and achievement, rather than meeting basic needs. CSOs provide 
opportunities and physical settings to draw upon, maintain, and to build social capital.  
10.4.7. Religious, Cultural, and Other Organizations that Support Belief Systems  
This section addresses social institutions, including religious and cultural organizations, as well as other 
groups that support various belief systems, such as philosophies, ideologies, and science. From a 
traditional sociological perspective, religion is one of societys fundamental institutions.  
As an institution, religion involves shared patterns of beliefs and behaviors that bring people together, 
helping them understand the meaning and purpose of life. Religion is additionally characterized as groups 
that provide a sense of solidarity and common purpose [Witt 2013]. Generally, the institution of religion 
facilitates social cohesion, emotional support, and social control, in addition to serving as an instrument 
for socialization and providing answers for unexplained natural phenomena. Other organizations that 
support belief systems serve a similar function.  
As with community service organizations, the roles of religious and other organizations may change in 
the context of a hazard event. The demands for their day-to-day services may increase, to provide 
additional social (e.g., emotional and mental health) support for members. In addition, their services may 
change based on the physical needs of their members; for example, providing food and shelter.  
As a social institution, organizations that support belief systems primarily meet the belonging and growth 
and achievement needs identified by Maslow. In some cases, they also address basic survival needs. 
10.4.8. Media 
Media refers to the channels of communication that, in some way, disseminate information to large 
markets (e.g., the entire population of a country) and smaller markets (e.g., a community or specific 
demographic within a larger population). A channel or form of communication is often referred to as one-
to-many in that one person (for example, the author of a book) communicates his/her information to an 
audience of many. The communication is one-way, as there is rarely an ability to provide feedback to the 
author [Sociology Central 2011], and requires a vehicle, e.g., newspaper, books, and magazines for print 
media; and radio, television, cable, and the Internet for broadcast media. 
Within the last 25 years, the opportunity for many-to-many communication was created with the 
development of computer networks. Internet chatrooms, peer-to-peer networks, and social network media 
provide means for mass audiences to simultaneously interact and communicate with each other. 
The media institution has four main functions and four additional sub-functions. The four main functions 
are: dissemination of information, education (directly or indirectly, via documentaries, interviews, etc.), 
entertainment, and persuasion. Additional sub-functions include surveillance (watching society to warn 
about threatening actions); interpretation (supplying data and facts, explaining and interpreting events and 
situations); linkages, joining together other types of social institutions (Section 10.7); and socialization or 
the transmission of culture [The Online Media 2012]. 
The media institution connects individuals with information from around the world, the nation, the state, 
and the local community. Most communities have local media outlets that disseminate information about 
local conditions on a daily basis, via local newspapers, websites, magazines, radio stations, and/or 
22 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Dependencies among and within Social 
Institutions 
television. Additionally, some local communities house main offices or headquarters of world-, national-, 
or state-level news outlets.  
When a hazard event occurs, it is often the role of the media to relay information on the physical and 
social consequences of the event, as well as details on recovery assistance to community survivors. In 
addition to their own sources, the media rely on other sources to disseminate recovery information, 
including the local government (i.e., emergency management agencies), businesses, health departments, 
community groups, and the public. Information about an event can come from any level of media, 
including the public, itself, often within moments of the disaster occurring. Depending upon the hazard 
events lead or warning time, levels of news outlets often rush to the location to provide coverage. For 
hazard events with little or no lead-time, local media broadcasters and writers are often first on scene; 
however, within hours or days, media outlets from around the world converge to cover the story. It is 
often not until days  or even weeks  after an event, when all larger-scale media outlets have left the 
area, that the dissemination of response and recovery information falls primarily to local media sources. 
The media institution, at all levels, meets many of Maslows hierarchy of needs. First, it meets safety and 
security needs, by providing information, interpretation and surveillance to the audiences. Additionally, 
via its socialization function, it can promote belonging among its audience. Finally, the media institution 
meets the need for growth and achievement by educating and entertaining society.  
10.5. Dependencies among and within Social Institutions 
Characterizing the social community also includes identifying the dependencies among and within social 
institutions.  
10.5.1. Dependencies among Social Institutions 
A disruption in the built environment that affects one social institution will likely affect others. It is 
important for a community to identify the ways social institutions are connected with each other, referred 
to here as dependencies. Since each community is different, it is impossible to provide an exhaustive list 
of all the ways social institutions are dependent on one another. Instead, examples of dependencies among 
social institutions are provided here [Holistic Disaster Recovery 2006], using the following template 
phrase: Institution A relies on Institution B for (insert function). Note: their reliance on each other is 
likely to vary over time and depends on the nature of their connection. 
x The government relies on the economic institution for local taxes (e.g., sales taxes) 
x The government relies on the economic institution (i.e., law firms) to conduct legal cases 
[Cassens Weiss 2008] 
x The family/kinship institution relies on the economic or government institutions for jobs 
x The economic institution (i.e., suppliers of goods and service [e.g., restaurants, staff]) relies on 
the family/kinship institution for a customer base; at the same time, the family/kinship institution 
relies on the economic institution for places to shop for goods and services [Phillips 2009] 
x Each social institution relies on the family/kinship institution for labor supply or workforce.  
There are additional instances where dependencies may include more than two social institutions. The 
examples below show dependencies that involve three or more social institutions:  
x The family and kinship institution relies on the media to provide information on what is 
happening within the government, health, and educational institutions [The Online Media 2012]. 
23 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Social- and Economic-Based Community Metrics 
x The family and kinship institution relies on the education or government institutions to provide 
childcare, in order for adults to return to work within the economic or government institutions.  
x The family and kinship institution relies on the government and/or economic institutions for food 
and water at home, and financial assistance (for example) before they can return to work within 
the economic or government institutions. 
10.5.2. Dependencies within Social Institutions 
Within particular institutions, such as the economic or government institutions, industries/entities rely on 
each another to perform their functions. Therefore, dependencies also exist among services located within 
each institution. An example is shown here for dependencies within the economic institution.  
Industries can be important drivers of the economy due to their size (e.g., contribution to GDP), 
proportion of the workforce they employ, or their importance to other industries (e.g., as producers and 
consumers of intermediate goods from other industries). A disruption to the built environment has the 
potential to affect several, seemingly unrelated industries across the economy through these inter-industry 
relationships. National and regional input-output models capture the inter-industry linkages. 
Table 10-3 presents each industrys (1) size in millions of dollars of GDP, (2) percent contribution to total 
GDP, (3) impact per dollar demand, and (4) impact of dollar supply. The percent contribution of GDP 
shows the total flows from an industry as a percent of all flows in the economy. The impact per dollar 
demand is the value of GDP from other industries needed to produce one dollar of GDP from the listed 
industry  it shows what happens when flows to an industry are disrupted. The impact per dollar supply is 
the change in GDP that results from a dollar change in GDP from the listed industry  it shows what 
happens when the flows from an industry are disrupted [World Input-Output Database 2011]. For 
example, the Wholesale and Retail Trade industry added $1.96 trillion dollars to the U.S. economy in 
2011, which constituted 13 % of U.S. GDP. To produce $1.0 million of GDP in Wholesale and Retail 
Trade, required $1.4 million of GDP produced by the other industries in the economy. To produce $1.0 
million of GDP from other industries in the economy requires $1.94 million of GDP produced by 
Wholesale and Retail Trade.  
A smaller impact per dollar demand value implies a larger potential for an industry to be affected by 
disruptions in other industries. For example, the electricity, gas, and water supply industry is the most 
sensitive to production value changes from the rest of the economy. A smaller impact per dollar supply 
value implies a larger potential for other industries to be affected by a disruption from an industry (e.g., 
the economy is most sensitive to production value changes from the finance and real estate industry). 
The example in Table 10-3 details data on industry size and inter-industry relevance at a national level. 
This example can help communities think about the ways their industries interconnect at the local level 
and provide some guidance on how to quantify dependencies, if the industry size and relevance data 
exists at the local level. 
10.6. Social- and Economic-Based Community Metrics 
Another aspect of characterizing the social community is identifying what success may look like in terms 
of resilience for the community. In other words, what methods (or metrics) will they use to track success 
of planning efforts and improvements made to achieve community resilience? The overall questions that 
community metrics will help to answer are: 
x How resilient is my community? 
24 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Social- and Economic-Based Community Metrics 
x Will my communitys decisions and investments improve resilience? If so, how significant a 
difference will be made? 
Table 10-3: Industry size and inter-industry relevance in the  [Source: World Input-
Output Database 2011; Timmer 2012] 
GDP  Impact $/ Impact $/ 
Industry % GDP 
($ million) Demand Supply 
Agriculture and mining 466,194  3.1 1.74 1.92 
Food, beverages and tobacco 221,187  1.5 3.36 2.48 
Other manufacturing 1,627,644  10.8 2.08 1.66 
Electricity, gas and water supply 246,896  1.6 1.21 2.62 
Construction 549,011  3.6 1.69 2.70 
Wholesale and retail trade 1,960,689  13.0 1.40 1.94 
Hotels and restaurants 473,854  3.1 1.71 2.68 
Inland transport 191,587  1.3 1.82 2.51 
Water transport 14,819  0.1 2.14 2.99 
Air transport 65,468  0.4 2.07 2.97 
Other supporting and auxiliary transport activities; 142,442  0.9 1.44 2.33 
activities of travel agencies 
Post and telecommunications 370,637  2.5 1.62 2.33 
Finance and real estate 5,034,867  33.4 1.50 1.36 
Public admin and defense; compulsory social security 1,853,704  12.3 1.54 2.68 
Community, social and personal services 1,869,079  12.4 1.57 2.35 
Social and economic metrics are important, specifically for the purposes of this Guide, because 
community decision-makers will be interested in predicting the economic and social implications (either 
positive or negative) of community decisions (either active or passive) made with respect to planning, 
siting, design, construction, operation, protection, maintenance, repair, and restoration of the built 
environment. Social and economic-based resilience metrics can be quantitative or descriptive in nature. 
The output or result can be presented as an overall resilience-related score or as a set of separately 
reported scores across a broad spectrum of physical, economic, and social dimensions. Examples of 
resilience metrics for social and economic systems and existing community resilience assessment 
methodologies are provided in Chapter 16 of this Guide. 
25 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Links between the Social Institutions and the Built 
Environment 
10.7. Links between the Social Institutions and the Built Environment 
Some social institutions rely more heavily on the built environment than others. An example of this is 
within the health institution, where, for the most part, emergency services are often difficult to provide 
outside of hospitals or other buildings on a longer-term basis. The study conducted by the Oregon 
Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGMI), in partnership with the Oregon Health 
Authority, examined the dependencies that hospitals had on infrastructure systems. After a Cascadia 
earthquake, damage to the local water systems and transportation networks will slow response and 
recovery of hospitals, and impair hospital services for community members [Wang 2014].  
However, not all social institutions rely on the built environment in the same way. Information, skills, and 
values may be transferred through the Internet or virtually within the education institution. However, even 
in remote situations, where the need for a particular building is absent, we rely on communications 
systems to function. 
The built environment supports many functions of social institutions within a community. It is important 
that a community identify the ways in which the built environment supports each social institutions 
functions. Sections 10.7.1 through 10.7.4 offer examples of linkages between social institutions and the 
built environment, specifically buildings, transportation, energy, communication, and water and 
wastewater systems under normal circumstances. Examples are provided in Section 10.7.6 to explore 
additional links between social institutions and the built environment in the event of a hazard event. 
Table 10-4 to Table 10-7 provide examples of day-to-day linkages between the social institutions and the 
built environment. For each social institution, the tables offer examples of the purpose of the built 
environment for the social institution, how that purpose is actualized, and the direct and indirect 
consequences that may occur to individuals, groups, and the community after a design or extreme event. 
10.7.1. Links between Buildings and Social Institutions 
Buildings provide places to live, work, learn, access health services, obtain goods and services, conduct 
business, and produce and package raw materials and goods, for example. In addition, buildings provide 
shelter and storage locations, and house technology for a number of different purposes within a 
community. 
These purposes are actualized through construction and maintenance of different types of building stock, 
including residential, commercial, industrial, educational, institutional, and storage buildings. Without 
buildings to support social functions within a community, the community can be exposed to direct or 
indirect consequences that can impact individuals, families, businesses, or the broader community. 
Examples of possible direct consequences include disruption of governmental services (such as 
emergency response), loss of employment or shelter for community members, loss of revenue for 
businesses or the community, and increased mental distress for community members. Examples of 
indirect consequences include loss of workforce, shortages of supplies, and an increased number of 
people at risk of further harm (labeled in the tables as at-risk populations).  
Table 10-4 provides examples of the ways the eight social institutions rely on buildings on a day-to-day 
basis. More specifically, examples are provided to present the purpose of buildings within each social 
institution, the ways in which these purposes are actualized among building types, and the impact to 
individuals, businesses, and community if buildings were damaged. Additional information on buildings 
and the methods used to create performance goals for buildings can be found in Chapter 12.  
26 
 
 
 
 
 
  
creased demand for   
Indirectterm causality rates;  
-
risk population; risk population
 --
icate with others; increased 
d to emergent issues and needs; 
 Overcrowding; inability to locate and commununrest/crime; loss of workforceLoss of taxes; loss of market share; price increases; shortages; decreased spending; increased demand of substitutes; decreased demand of complements; inunemployment benefits; increased supply of labor in like industries; loss of residentsIncreased causalities and economic damage; increased opportunity for social disorder and crime; inability to responloss of residentsIncreased longincreased disease transmission; loss of residentsDecreased economic productivity; lower wages; loss of residentsIncreased atincreased crime; loss of residents/volunteersIncreased atIncreased uncertainty; increased threat exposure
;    
-
 
Volume II 
  
- 
 
 hand; loss of 
-
Possible Impacts if Buildings are Damaged
Direct
, personal possessions
 
; increased mental distress
 
of materials on
Loss of shelterdisplaced population; increased causalities; increased mental distressLoss of revenue; loss of employment; loss goods and services for sale; loss of income; loss of means of productionDiminished emergency response; disruption to government continuity; loss of archived materialsDecreased ability to treat; increased causalitiesLoss of shelter; displaced student population Loss of food, water; shelter for atrisk populations; increased mental distressLoss of shelter; loss of cultural value; increased mental distressLoss of information; loss of the dissemination of information
 
rgent  
u stations; 
 
 27
; , offices
family; etc.)
-quipment/ 
 e
ssisted living television 
a
Links between the Social Institutions and the Built Environmentsocial institutions and buildings 
, ialysis centers; 
d
harmaciesffices; 
health agencies;; po
ospices; 
h
family; multi
-
Environment
mental 
;  
singleoison centers;  ewspapers/ magazine publishing; 
n
p
ourts and courthouses; libraries and 
Links between ; malls; restaurants; banks; hotels; clinicsursing homes; 
e.g., nstorage
: cafes; online storefronts; gas stations;  
4
-How Purpose is Actualized within Built 
10
ehabilitation centers; esidential/housing (e.g., home health care)adio station; ublishers headquarters; 
Housing (Processing facility; warehouse; commercial office; processing plant; manufacturing facility; warehouse; goods (buildings and manufactured products) for sale; storesschools and colleges; hospitals and medical facilities; arenas/stadia; salons and barbershops; Internet airports; houses and apartmentsOffices; police stations; fire and EMS stations; emergency operations centers (EOCs); military installations; jails and prisons; government chambers; carchivesHospitals; care centers; rfacilities; rSchools; universities (campus and dormitories); educational offices; museums; librariesHousing and provision of sustenanceChurches; synagogues; other places of worship; meeting placesNews and broadcasting stations; rpcomputer 
;  
Table 
care
 
 
medical 
 
fore
 
s
tor
and s
 disseminate 
 term health  
emergency-
 pharmaceuticals
 
; house equipment production where people can 
 
 , and 
gather and 
and long
 
Institution
 to receive-to learn; to where basic needs can be of worship; social to 
     
commerce/exchange, sssss
, locations 
(the buildings themselves may 
short
and products  
  lace
shelter, safety and security; equipment
 
for recreation,
 ents 
rovide a place for belonging (among 
Purpose of Buildings within each Social Provide a place to live; build a family; provide pfamily/friends)Prepare materials for transport; store materialsand machinery; design and develop goods (buildings and manufactured products); process raw materials; location; point of sale; locationemploymentrecreationProvide work and meeting space for leaders and staff; serve as a document repository; protect communication systems; house public safetyemergency response capabilities (people; equipment; vehicles); provide public spacesProvide placeto address needs (physical and mental); recordsProvide placeinteract/connect; storage for equipment and booksProvide placemet (in some cases; shelter and sustenance); interact with othersProvide placeinteraction; education; daycare; and other basic services; provide places to house and protect religious and cultural artifacts/ documbe considered sacred or have symbolic meaning)Provide pnews and information; protect all media technology and equipment
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community
  
 
  
   
anization
ommunity ervice rganization
 FamilyEconomicGovernmentHealthEducationCSOReligious OrgMedia
 
  
  
  
term and  
 -ncreased 
ties and 
Indirect; overloading of risk populationrisk population
--
 
 
 
 
 Demand for shortnearby shelter alternativesLoss of taxes; decreased demand of complements; idemand of substitutes; decreased spending; increased demand for unemployment benefits; increased supply of labor in like industriesLoss of market shareIncreased causalieconomic damage; increased opportunity for social disorder and crime;Understaffing; inability to respond to emergent issues and needsEquipment and supply shortages; understaffinghealth care systemIncreased reliance on distance learningIncreased atIncreased atSpread of misinformation
 
 
   
Volume II  
 
-increased 
 
 
 
risk population to 
Direct-
 
Possible Impacts if Transportation Systems are Damaged
Displaced population (lack of access); inability to physically connect with othersSupply chain disruptions; loss of employment; consumers unable to obtain survival goodsDiminished emergency response; disruption to government continuity Longer travel times for care/delivery of supplies; increased causalities; number of acute patients; increased mental distressDisplaced student population (lack of access)Inability of atobtain food, water and shelter; increased mental distressIncreased mental distressInability to obtain information
 
 
between the Social Institutions and the Built Environment28
Links 
, 
social institutions and transportation systems
 
Links between How Actualized within Built Environment
: Roads and bridges; airports; railways and rail stations; seaports; pipelines; tunnels; subways; public transit
5
-
 
10; 
 
  
 pplies, 
 
i.e., to other 
Table , healthreligious media 
 
; Delivery  volunteers
, leaders
 
employment, 
 making bodies; 
-
staff
for sale; bring , patrol, and  for 
, staffcommunity 
for
 , , 
 
Transportation within 
); provide physical access clients
 
locationstransport of products; 
for patients 
 ; also to news sites
each Social Institutionand products ; Transport of products
congregation
 
,
Purpose of ransport of productstaff
Understanding and Characterizing the Social CommunityAccess to and from housingand from social events, shopping, and locations important to the family.Distribute goods for processing; obtain labor and capital; distribute intermediate goods; distribute final goods sellers (providers) and consumers together; getting to and returning from workProvide access to services; facilitates delivery of services (including emergency responsesurveillanceto lawmakers and lawprovide physical access to legal venuesProvide access to and from servicesof equipment, materials, and suProvide access to and from educational servicesstudents/parents; teachersProvide access to and from CSO services fortProvide access to and from and cultural services for smembersProvide access to and from services
  
 
  
    
anization
FamilyEconomicGovernmentHealthEducationCommunity Service OrganizationReligious OrgMedia
  
  
  
 
 
risks for 
  
risk populationrisk population
--
Indirect
 
ng/heating sources
erns
 Increased exposure to risk from displacement or searching for those unable to contact; increased fire risk and reduced indoor air quality from use of alternative lightiLoss of taxes; increased waste; decreased spendingIncreased security public officialsIncreased cost; reliability concDecreased economic productivity; lower wagesIncreased atIncreased atSpread of misinformation
 
 
Volume II 
  
- 
 
 
r supply
risk population 
 -
Directto distribute 
difficulty to 
 
  
Possible Impacts if Energy Systems are Damaged
Displaced population; increased maintain food, water, and shelter security; communication ability limitedSupply chain disruptions; loss of employment; reduced availability survival goods; decreased securityIncreased reliance on temporary power supply; reduced response effectivenessIncreased reliance on temporary power supply; increased causalitiesDisplaced student population; communication ability limited, including long distance learningInability of atto obtain food, water, and shelter; increased mental distressIncreased mental distressIncreased reliance on temporary powe
  
29
 
Links between the Social Institutions and the Built Environment
, 
social institutions and energy systems
Environment
How Actualized within Built Supply, distribution and collection 
Links between 
: 
6ipelines; pump stations; valves
-Generation facilities; grids; substations; lines; p
10
  
 
Table  
powere.g., power power allow 
 ; fuel ,   (
    
sale;  
; charging -)
; fuel for vehiclesequipment
  
,, equipment
; fuel for vehicles
 (e.g., life support 
, equipment   ; fuel for vehicles
heating; cooling;
; fuel for vehicles
Social Institution; power for point of sale 
technologytechnology, equipment, technology, equipment, 
ighting; heating; cooling; use of 
Purpose of Energy within each 
Lappliancesof electronicsAbility to operate machinery; lightingdevices; heating and cooling; power for point of nonservice use areaLighting; heating; coolingfor vehiclesLighting; heating; cooling; power for appliancessystems)Lighting; heating; cooling;for technologycomputers; appliancesLighting; heating; cooling;for appliancesLighting; for appliancesLighting; heating; cooling;for use of broadcasting/ media equipment
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community
  
 
 
  
    
anization
FamilyEconomicGovernmentHealthEducationCommunityService OrganizationReligious OrgMedia
  
 
 
 
 
incorrect 
 
 
supply of goods 
-treatment
Indirect - risk populationrisk population
--
for those unable to 
  
ingor under
 
-
 Increased exposure risk from searchcommunicateLarge price adjustment due to overand services (from market signals); decreased spendingDecreased trust of government; increased voter apathyIncreased causalities due to incorrect selfDecreased economic productivity; lower wagesIncreased atIncreased atSpread of misinformation; poor decision making
 
   and 
Volume II  
 
-
 distance 
-
 
Directsalities and 
 
nstitutions and the Built EnvironmentPossible Impacts if Communications are Damaged 
 
Increased mental distress; Loss of situation awareness on status of familySupply chain disruptions; loss of employment/clients; loss of business continuity; shortages of food, water, and shelter; inability to access finances to purchase goods Diminished emergency response; increased caueconomic damage; disruption to government continuity; increased opportunity for social disorder and crimeIncreased inability to access patient records, inability to prepare for patient influxLimited use of longlearning; Loss of situation awareness on status of students/childrenIncreased mental distressIncreased mental distressLimited ability to obtain disseminate information
 - 
1
-
1; social 
- 
1
 -  30
ng Centers], 
; TV and radio ; TV and radio 
Links between the Social I
, 
InternetInternet
the last mile])the last mile])the last mile])
; TV and radio media; 9
social institutions and communications systems
i.e., i.e., i.e., 
[Central Offices, Internet 
Internet1 call centers; reverse 9
-
1
-
9
 
How Actualized within Built Environment 
Links between Telephones (landlines and cell/mobile); computers; 1(Critical Nodes Exchange Points, Mobile Switching Centers], and distribution [Telephones; computers; media; media; community alert and warning systems(Critical Nodes [Central Offices, Internet Exchange Points, Mobile Switching Centers], and distribution [Telephones; computers; media(Critical Nodes [Central Offices, Internet Exchange Points, Mobile Switchiand distribution [
: 
7
-; 
10 
  
, 
Table 
with CSO 
 
 
, others outside 
public access to 
 
  
; access 
 
volunteerscongregation
employees, programs, 
provide  , , 
 
each Social Institutionstaffstaff
, , 
 
; access information/ resources between CSOs
 
Purpose of Communication within 
Understanding and Characterizing the Social CommunityDevelop/strengthen ties with family/friends; Promote a sense of belongingObtain market signals; support production and safety activities; advertising; recruiting new employees; transmit and receive financial transactions; offer and deliver services; obtain information on goods and services available; process paymentsTransmission of information; including emergency broadcast messaging; governmentmessages, etc.Transfer of information among heath staff(e.g.; medical records); Facilitate/strengthen ties between patients, staff, and families/friendsTransfer of information among educators, staffinformation/resources (e.g.; online); Facilitate/strengthen ties between students, staff, familiesFacilitate/strengthen ties between clientsandFacilitate/strengthen ties between leaderscommunity membersof orgFacilitate/strengthen ties among staffaccess information/ resources (e.g.; online); broadcast information 
  
 
  
    
anization
FamilyEconomicGovernmentHealthEducationCommunity Service OrganizationReligious OrgMedia
 
  
   
and
  
 
uppression 
 
risk populationrisk populationrisk population
---
Indirect
, social capital
 
 
 Loss of neighborhoods, workforceIncreased environmental degradation; reduced productivity due to workforce disruption; decreased spendingDiminished fire scapability; inability to respond to emergent issues and needsIncreased atIncreased reliance on distance learningIncreased atIncreased atSpread of misinformation loss of public confidence
 
Volume II  
   
- 
 
 
Directrisk population to 
 -
  
 
food, water, and shelter; 
y chain disruptions; 
Possible Impacts if Water/Wastewater Systems are Damaged
Increased health risk; displaced population; unsanitary conditions; increased likelihood of disease outbreak; loss of public confidenceSupplWorkforce & production disruption; reduced facility functionDiminished emergency response; increased causalities and economic damage; increased fire risk; disruption to government continuity and loss of public confidenceUnsanitary conditions; increased likelihood for disease transmission; loss of medical facility functionality; patient displacementDisplaced student population; unsanitary conditionsInability of atobtain increased mental distressIncreased mental distressLimit ability to obtain and disseminate information
 
31
 
Links between the Social Institutions and the Built Environment
,  
Environment
How Actualized within Built 
Supply, distribution and collection pipelines; pump stations; valves; fire hydrants; treatment facilities; finished water storage 
 
: Links between social institutions and water and wastewater systems   
8; 
-
 ; 
10
 
Institution
Table  ; recreation ; recreation ; and ability to ; recreation 
washing); 
 ; fire protectionthat require water 
cooling; cleaning; fire protection; 
aundry, washing); 
 
disposal
 
rinking;
Purpose of Water/Wastewater within each Social rinking; cooling; cleaning 
D(bathing, laundry, washing)wasteirrigation, drainageProcessing; manufacturing; productiond(bathing, laundry, washing); waste disposal; fire protection; irrigation, drainageDrinking; cooling; cleaning (bathing, laundry, waste disposal; fire protection; irrigation, drainageDrinking; cooling; cleaning (bathing, laundry, washing); waste disposal; fire protection; irrigation, drainageuse specific medical equipment and processes (e.g.; dialysis, laundry)Drinking; cooling; cleaning (bathing, lwaste disposal; fire protection; irrigation, drainage
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community
  
 
  
    
anization
ommunity ervice rganization
FamilyEconomicGovernmentHealthEducationCSOReligious OrgMedia
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Links between the Social Institutions and the Built 
Environment 
10.7.2. Links between Transportation and Social Institutions 
Transportation systems include roads and bridges, airports, railways and rail stations, seaports, 
waterways, pipelines, tunnels, subways, and other public transit systems. Transportation systems provide 
access to the buildings discussed in Table 10-4, as well as allow for other vital activities, including the 
distribution of raw materials and intermediate goods to producers and final goods to consumers. For 
example, roads and bridges support the transport of raw materials to production facilities, final goods to 
retail stores, and ultimately, to consumers, and workers to their places of employment. Rail networks 
support the same types of functions. The transportation assets available within the community and the 
ways these assets support the functions of the communitys social institutions need to be characterized. 
Table 10-5 provides examples of the purpose of transportation systems within each social institution and 
the possible consequences to these social institutions if the transportation systems were damaged within a 
community. Additional information on transportation systems and the methods used to create 
performance goals for these systems is found in Chapter 13.  
10.7.3. Links between Energy and Social Institutions 
Energy systems allow for use of buildings (i.e., lighting, heating, and cooling) as well as operation of 
equipment, appliances, and technology vital to the functions of each social institution. For example, 
hospitals rely on energy to operate life-saving technology in intensive care units. Energy is also used to 
operate machinery within manufacturing plants and facilities to produce materials and goods for the 
economic institution. 
Table 10-6 gives examples of the purpose of power/energy systems within each social institution and the 
possible consequences to these social institutions if the energy systems were damaged within a 
community. Additional information on power and energy networks and the methods used to create 
performance goals for these systems is in Chapter 13.  
10.7.4. Links between Communications and Social Institutions 
Communication systems transmit information, allowing recipients to achieve situational awareness on a 
specific subject or event. For example, the media and government institutions are often tasked with 
communicating information to the public in the event of an emergency. Often this information is urgent, 
in that it has to be disseminated in a timely manner, to ensure safety.  
Almost all social institutions use communication systems to access or transmit records or other 
information among relevant parties. Within the economic institution, communication systems can be used 
to obtain market signals, support production and safety activities, advertise products and services, 
transmit and receive financial transactions, offer and deliver services, obtain information on goods and 
services available, and process payments. 
Many different types of technology can be used to disseminate or transmit information between parties. 
For example, technologies can include phones, computers, television, radio, Reverse 9-1-1, social media, 
and community alert and warning systems for emergencies (for example, public siren systems). These 
technologies are included in Table 10-7.  
Table 10-7 provides examples of the purpose of communication systems within each social institution and 
the possible impacts to these social institutions if these systems were damaged within a community. 
Additional information on communication networks and developing performance goals can be found in 
Chapter15. 
32 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Community Performance Goals Based on 
Community Member Needs 
10.7.5. Links between Water and Wastewater and Social Institutions 
Water and wastewater systems support many functions within social institutions, including the safe use 
and operation of various types of buildings. Water and wastewater systems allow drinking, cooking, 
cleaning (including bathing, laundry, washing), cooling (for air conditioning), irrigation, drainage, as well 
as the ability to eliminate personal waste. Within the economics institution, and more specifically, in the 
production of raw materials and goods, water is also used to create goods and services, and wastewater 
systems are important in the elimination of production waste from equipment operation. Additionally, the 
water distribution system provides fire suppression capabilities at a neighborhood level, as well as 
internal building fire suppression systems. 
Table 10-8 gives examples of the purpose of water/wastewater systems within each social institution and 
the possible impacts to these social institutions if the water/wastewater systems were damaged within a 
community. Additional information on water and wastewater networks and the methods used to create 
performance goals for these systems can be found in Chapter 15.  
10.7.6. Links between Social Institutions and the Built Environment after a Disaster 
After a hazard event, new linkages between social institutions and the built environment may develop, or 
existing linkages may change for a period of time.  
A buildings use may change to support critical functions within the community. Examples of buildings 
that have been used as shelters include schools, hospitals, community service organizations, and houses of 
worship. Other community buildings, like libraries, might also be repurposed for government offices. 
Additionally, there is often a need to connect or reconnect with family members and friends after a hazard 
event occurs. In these cases, buildings have been used as reunification points. Church buildings or 
schools, in particular, tend to emerge as central meeting locations in the days and weeks during response 
and recovery activities. It is important, however, for communities to consider buildings supporting critical 
and recovery functions as a system of systems that need to be supported with services from infrastructure 
systems.  
The transportation system is needed to physically access critical buildings and locations throughout the 
community. Access is required by decision-makers who assess the damage; staff, volunteers and key 
personnel who provide essential services; and members of the public who are in need of these essential 
services. Transportation systems can also be used to evacuate people from the area as well as a way to 
reunite family members following an event. 
The communication system allows communication between emergency agencies and the public prior to, 
during, and after a hazard event to disseminate response and recovery information. Communication 
systems support situational awareness, so that family and friends know the status of their loved ones 
safety and their location. With many of the social institutions, especially those that are required to 
function immediately after the event occurs, e.g., health and government, it is critical that decision-
makers can reach their staff, volunteers, emergency providers, and those they serve.  
Most of the examples discussed in this section occur during the short-term or intermediate periods of the 
recovery timeline. As the community rebuilds and recovers, and begins to function again, the reliance of 
the social systems on the built environment returns to the desired day-to-day status. 
10.8. Community Performance Goals Based on Community Member Needs 
Once the communitys social dimensions and the built environment are characterized, and linkages are 
identified between the two, communities can see the consequences of damage to or degradation of the 
33 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, Community Performance Goals Based on 
Community Member Needs 
built environment on the social environment. Examples of consequences are given in the last two columns 
of Table 10-4 to Table 10-8.  
Characterization of the social and built environments provides an informed basis upon which to establish 
long-term community goals for resilience, the third step of the six-step Guide methodology. This section 
contains examples of long-term community performance goals for social institutions. These goals can 
help communities prioritize resilience investments in their buildings and infrastructure systems.  
Examples of community performance goals for the social institutions that meet urgent or time sensitive 
needs of community members include the following: 
x Goal 1: Strengthen the ability for government to function continuously after an event 
x Goal 2: Strengthen ability for critical health care to function continuously before and after an 
event 
Specific government functions (e.g., police, fire, 
medical, and emergency management), as well as 
critical health care functions (e.g., acute, sub-
acute, chronic, and mental health care), among 
other institutions (e.g., CSOs), provide services Growth
that meet survival and urgent safety and security &
needs of community members, as shown in Figure 
10-3. Therefore, it may be an important goal for Achievement
communities to strengthen the buildings and 
infrastructure systems that support the continuous 
functioning of government and/or health Belonging
institutions before and after a hazard event occurs. 
Communities may also wish to develop long-term 
community goals that meet safety and security Safety and Security
needs of community members, i.e., 
employment/jobs, in addition to supporting the GovernmentHealth
Survival
longer-term needs of a community to grow and 
prosper, economically. Two examples are:  
x Goal 3: Improve current employment Figure 10-3: Alignment of the Government and 
rates within the community health institutions with Maslows Hierarchy of 
x Goal 4: Attract new businesses to the Needs [Adapted from Maslow 1943] 
community  
A communitys local economy provides jobs to 
people within the community, allowing them to achieve the financial security they require (as shown by 
Maslows hierarchy, Figure 10-4). A growing economy provides not only additional jobs to community 
members, lowering the unemployment rate and increasing their changes for financial security, it also 
provides a stable flow of taxes into the communitys reserves, potentially allowing them to provide 
additional services for individuals and families living within the community. Therefore, it may be an 
important goal for communities to strengthen the buildings and infrastructure systems that support the 
economy after a hazard event occurs. 
Numerous additional examples can be developed by communities for education, media, CSOs, and 
religious/belief organizations. All of these organizations meet various needs of individuals and families 
within communities along the Maslow continuum, as shown in Figure 10-5. It will be up to individual 
communities to identify the specific community-wide goals for social institutions  and from these goals, 
34 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, References 
begin to prioritize changes and/or improvements to the buildings and infrastructure systems that support 
them. 
GrowthGrowth
&&
AchievementAchievement
Education
Belonging
Belonging
Media
Safety and Security
Safety and Security
EconomicEconomicGovernmentHealth
SurvivalSurvival
FamilyCSOs
 FamilyBelief Systems
 
Figure 10-4: Alignment of the economic and Figure 10-5: Alignment of all the social 
family/kinship institutions with Maslows institutions with Maslows Hierarchy of Needs 
Hierarchy of Needs [Adapted from Maslow 1943] [Adapted from Maslow 1943] 
10.9. References 
Aldrich, D.P. and M.A. Meyer (2014) Social Capital and Community Resilience, American Behavioral 
Scientist, published online, 1 October 2014. 
Arup (2014) City Resilience Framework, The Rockefeller Foundation and Ove Arup & Partners 
International Limited, April, 
http://www.arup.com/~/media/Publications/Files/Publications/C/City_Resilience_Framework_pdf.ashx. 
Viewed December 28, 2014. 
Association for Prevention Teaching and Research (2015) Module 5: Healthcare Systems, 
http://www.aptrweb.org/?page=module5. Viewed January 5, 2015. 
Belcher, J.C., and F.L. Bates (1983) Aftermath of natural disasters: Coping through residential 
mobility, Disasters, June, 7 (2): 118-128. 
Binder, Sherri Brokopp (2014) Resilience and Postdisaster Relocation: A study of New Yorks home 
buyout plan in the wake of Hurricane Sandy. Quick Response Grant Final Report: New Yorks Home 
Buyout Plan after Hurricane Sandy, University of Hawaii at Manoa, 
http://www.colorado.edu/hazards/research/qr/submitted/binder_2013.pdf. 
Black, R.; D. Kniveton; R. Skeldon; D. Coppard; A. Murata; and K. Schmidt-Verkerk (2008) 
Demographics and Climate Change: Future Trends and their Policy Implications for Migration, 
Development Research Centre on Migration, Globalisation and Poverty, 
http://www.migrationdrc.org/publications/working_papers/WP-T27.pdf. 
35 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, References 
Bullard, R.D. and B. Wright, ed. (2009) Race, Place, and Environmental Justice After Hurricane 
Katrina: Struggles to reclaim, rebuild, and revitalize New Orleans and the Gulf Coast. Westview Press, 
Boulder, CO. 
Bureau of Economic Analysis (2013) Personal Consumption Expenditures by Major Type of Product, 
www.bea.gov.  
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2015) Current Population Survey, www.bls.gov.  
California Department of Health Care Services (2014) Subacute Care, 
http://www.dhcs.ca.gov/provgovpart/Pages/SubacuteCare.aspx. Viewed January 5, 2015. 
Cassens Weiss, D. (2008) Cedar Rapids Law Firm Opens Offices in Nearby Middle School, ABA 
Journal, 
http://www.abajournal.com/news/article/cedar_rapids_law_firm_opens_offices_in_nearby_middle_schoo
l. Viewed January 10, 2015. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC 2014) The Public Health System and the 10 Essential 
Public Health Services, National Public Health Performance Standards (NPHPS), Atlanta, GA, 
http://www.cdc.gov/nphpsp/essentialServices.html. Viewed February 26, 2015. 
Community & Regional Resilience Institute, Community Resilience Team (CARRI 2013) Building 
Resilience in Americas Communities: Observations and Implications of the CRS Pilots, Community & 
Regional Resilience Institute (CARRI), Washington, DC, http://www.resilientus.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/CRS-Final-Report.pdf. 
Cutter, S.L.; K.D. Ash; C.T. Emrich (2014) The geographies of community disaster resilience, Global 
Environmental Change, Volume 29, Pages 65-77. 
Dickinson, Simon Bernard (2013) Post-Disaster Mobilities: Exploring household relocation after the 
Canterbury Earthquakes, M.S. Thesis, Department of Geography, University of Canterbury, 
Christchurch, NZ. 
Division of Health Care Services, Institute of Medicine (1998) Measuring the Quality of Health Care, 
Molla S. Donaldson ed., National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 
Fraser, J. C.; M.W. Doyle; and H. Young (2006) Creating Effective Flood Mitigation Policies, Eos, 
87(27): 265270.  
Gilbert, Stanley W (2010) Disaster Resilience: A Guide to the Literature, National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST) Special Publication 1117, October 13. 
Gray, C.; E. Frankenberg; T. Gillespie; C. Sumantri; and D. Thomas (2009) Population Displacement and 
Mobility in Sumatra after the Tsunami, August, http://iussp2009.princeton.edu/papers/90318.  
Groen, J.A. and A.E. Polivka (2010) Going Home after Hurricane Katrina: Determinants of Return 
Migration and Changes in Affected Areas, Demography,47(4):821-844. 
Hogue, Carma (2013) Government Organization Summary Report: 2012,  Census Bureau, 
http://www2.census.gov/govs/cog/g12_org.pdf. Viewed January 15, 2015.  
Holistic Disaster Recovery (2006) Holistic Disaster Recovery: Ideas for Building Local Sustainability 
After a Natural Disaster (2006), Natural Hazards Center, University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, 
CO, http://www.colorado.edu/hazards/publications/holistic/holistic2006.html. 
Hunter, L.M. (2005) Migration and Environmental Hazards, Population and environment, 26(4): 273
302. doi:10.1007/s11111-005-3343-x. 
36 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, References 
Johns Hopkins Medicine (2015) Tertiary Care Definition, 
http://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/patient_care/pay_bill/insurance_footnotes.html. Viewed January 5, 
2015. 
Lieberson, Alan D. (2004) How Long Can a Person Survive without Food? Scientific American, 
November 8, http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-long-can-a-person-sur/. Viewed October 1, 
2014. 
Maslow, A.H. (1943) A Theory of Human Motivation, Psychological Review, 50 (4) 37096. 
Max-Neef, M.A.; A. Elizalde; and M. Hopenhayn (1991) Human Scale Development: Conception, 
Application and Further Reflections, The Apex Press, New York and London, http://www.area-
net.org/fileadmin/user_upload/papers/Max-neef_Human_Scale_development.pdf. 
MedicineNet.com (2015) Definition of Primary Care, 
http://www.medicinenet.com/script/main/art.asp?articlekey=5042. Viewed January 5, 2015. 
Nam, C.B (2004) "The Concept of The Family: Demographic and Genealogical Perspectives, Sociation 
Today, 2(2), http://www.ncsociology.org/sociationtoday/v22/family.htm. 
PBWorks (2007) CBOs  Introduction, public wiki, 
http://eder671nonprofit.pbworks.com/w/page/18541471/CBOs%20-%20Introduction. Retrieved April 7, 
2015. 
Peterson, D. (2015) What is Adult Education? About Education, 
http://adulted.about.com/od/whatisadultlearning/p/whatisadulteducation.htm. Viewed January 7, 2015. 
Phillips, Brenda (2009) Disaster Recovery, Boca Raton, FL: Taylor and Francis CRC Press. 
Phillips, Brenda; Deborah S.K. Thomas; Alice Fothergill; Lynn Blinn-Pike (2009) Social Vulnerability to 
Disasters, Boca Raton, FL: Taylor and Francis CRC Press. 
Putnam, Robert D (2000) Bowling Alone: The collapse and revival of American community, Simon & 
Schuster, New York, NY. 
Ritchie, L.A. and D.A. Gill (2007) Social Capital Theory as an Integrating Theoretical Framework in 
Technological Disaster Research, Sociological Spectrum, 27:103-129. 
Ritchie, L.A.; K. Tierney; D. Austin; M. Beres; C. Bevc; B. Gilbert; and J. Sutton (2008) Disaster 
Preparedness Among Community-Based Organizations in the City and County of San Francisco, 
Boulder, CO: The University of Colorado, Institute of Behavioral Science, Natural Hazards Center. 
Sanders, S.; S. Bowie; and Y.D. Bowie (2003) Lessons learned on forced relocation of older adults: The 
impact of Hurricane Andrew on health, mental health, and social support of public housing residents, 
Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 40(4), pp. 23-35 
Schuller, T.; S. Baron; and J. Field (2000) Social Capital: A Review and Critique. Social Capital: 
Critical Perspectives, edited by Stephen Baron, John Field, and Tom Schuller, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, pp. 1-38.  
Shi, Leiyu and Douglas A. Singh (2008) Delivering Health Care in America: A systems approach, Jones 
& Bartlett Publishers, Inc. Sudbury, MA.  
Sociology Central (2011) Defining the Mass Media, 
http://www.sociology.org.uk/media_defined.pdf.Viewed January 8, 2015. 
The Institute of Medicine (2015) Healthy, Resilient, and Sustainable Communities After Disasters: 
Strategies, opportunities, and planning for recovery, National Academies Press, Washington, DC. 
37 
I  
Understanding and Characterizing the Social Community, References 
The National Academies (2006) Facing Hazards and Disasters: Understanding human dimensions, 
National Academies Press, Washington, DC. 
The National Academies (2012) Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative, National Academies Press, 
Washington, DC. 
The Online Media (2012) Functions of Mass Media, 
http://theonlinemedia.blogspot.com/2012/06/functions-of-mass-media.html. Viewed January 9, 2015.  
Tierney, Kathleen (2014) The Social Roots of Risk: Producing Disasters, Promoting Resilience, Stanford 
University Press, Stanford, CA.  
Timmer, Marcel P. ed. (2012), The World Input-Output Database (WIOD): Contents, Sources and 
Methods, WIOD Working Paper Number 10, http://www.wiod.org/publications/papers/wiod10.pdf. 
 Census Bureau (2015)  Census Bureau,  Department of 
Commerce, Washington, DC, http://www.census.gov/. 
 Department of Education (2004) Building the Legacy: IDEA 2004, 
http://idea.ed.gov/explore/view/p/,root,regs,300,A,300%252E39. Viewed January 8, 2015. 
 Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS 1999) Mental Health: A Report of the 
Surgeon General. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS); Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration, Center for Mental Health Services, National Institutes of Health, 
National Institute of Mental Health, Rockville, MD, http://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/ps/access/NNBBHS.pdf. 
 Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS 2015) Preventive Care,  
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), http://www.hhs.gov/healthcare/about-the-
law/preventive-care/index.html. Viewed January 5, 2015. 
University of South Carolina (2013) Social Vulnerability Index for the  2006-10, Hazards 
and Vulnerability Research Institute, University of South Carolina, 
http://webra.cas.sc.edu/hvri/products/sovi.aspx. 
Wang, Yumei (2014) Hospital and Water System Earthquake Risk Evaluation: Report to the Oregon 
Health Authority, Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries.  
Witt, Jon (2013) SOC, 3rd Edition, New York: McGraw Hill. 
World Health Organization (1948) Preamble to the Constitution of the World Health Organization as 
adopted by the International Health Conference, New York, 19-22 June, 1946; signed on 22 July 1946 by 
the representatives of 61 States (Official Records of the World Health Organization, no (2, p. 100) and 
entered into force on 7 April 1948, World Health Organization (WHO). 
World Health Organization (2007) Everybodys Business: Strengthening Health Systems to Improve 
Health Outcomes, WHOs Framework for Action, 
http://www.who.int/healthsystems/strategy/everybodys_business.pdf. Viewed December 15, 2014. 
World Input-Output Database, http://www.wiod.org/new_site/database/wiots.htm.  
38 
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects, Dependencies Executive Summary 
11. Dependencies and Cascading Effects 
Dependencies Executive Summary 
A community resilience plan requires an understanding of building and infrastructure system 
dependencies and potential cascading effects. An overview is provided of possible dependencies between 
social systems and buildings and infrastructure systems for consideration when setting performance goals 
for community response and recovery times. Available tools for identifying dependencies, predicting the 
impact, and mitigating or managing dependencies are also presented. The term dependency is used in 
the Guide to indicate one-way dependencies. The term interdependency can indicate one-way 
dependencies, reciprocal dependencies, or multiple-level dependencies.  
Cascading failures occur when one failure triggers those of other components or systems. They can occur 
within one system or between systems when the failure of one system triggers failures in other systems. 
Dependency between infrastructure systems needs to be understood to restore infrastructure services in an 
appropriate sequence, and to avoid cascading delays in restoration of critical services. 
To determine the performance needed for clusters of the built environment and to protect a community 
from significant and non-reversible deterioration, communities need an orderly and rapid process for 
managing recovery. The recovery sequence should address the desired number of buildings in each 
designated cluster and the infrastructure systems that support them. Each clusters performance depends 
not only on its primary function, but also on dependencies between clusters and the infrastructure systems 
that support them.  
This chapter presents multiple dimensions of dependency: internal and external, time, space, and source 
dependencies. Due to the complex nature of infrastructure system interactions, these dimensions of 
dependency may not be decoupled.  
As part of the planning process, private and non-profit stakeholders, such as utilities, businesses, and 
organizations, should be encouraged to develop their own emergency and continuity of operations plans 
that include identifying dependencies, and the impacts of those dependencies on their operations.  
With knowledge of dependencies, stakeholders can have an informed discussion about the anticipated 
performance of buildings and infrastructure systems for the prevailing community hazards and desired 
service restoration times, and short and long-term resilience goals. It is important that all stakeholders are 
included in these discussions, including: elected officials, emergency managers, first responders, service 
providers, business leaders, civic organizations, community services organizations, etc.  
A community may use maps with a Geographic Information System (GIS) overlay of infrastructure 
systems and hazard data to coordinate the potential temporal and spatial dependencies of infrastructure 
systems. Such an assessment may include scenario-based assessment of infrastructure system 
depencencies or optomized prioritization of recovery of infrastructure function.  
11.1. Introduction 
An orderly and rapid process for managing recovery is needed for the designated clusters and 
infrastructure systems. Each clusters performance and primary function may be affected by dependencies 
between clusters. Considering dependencies can avoid potential cascading failures of multiple systems.  
Cascading failures can occur within one system, such as a power grid, when one component fails, causing 
an overload and subsequent failure of other components. They can also occur between systems, such as 
when loss of power causes failure in the cell phone system after emergency power for cell towers is 
expended. 
39 
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects, Dimensions of Dependency 
Identifying dependencies and potential cascading failures is the first step. Reducing the effect of 
dependencies and consequences, where possible, and setting performance goals that consider the role of 
dependent systems in community recovery can be achieved through multiple approaches. For example, 
dependencies can be reduced by adding redundancy, increasing capacity, and installing weak links that 
constructively isolate portions of a system. Governance processes and public policies also play a key role 
in developing plans for mitigation, response, and recovery management of dependencies. 
11.2. Dimensions of Dependency 
Interactions within and between infrastructure systems depend on a number of factors. Traditionally, 
dependencies consider the physical and functional relationship between different systems (i.e., drinking 
water systems require electricity to operate pumps). However, this is only one dimension that illustrates 
system interaction. This section presents multiple dimensions of dependency that can be considered in 
planning for community resilience: internal and external, time, space, and source dependencies. 
11.2.1. Internal and External Dependency 
Disruption to the normal operating state of the built environment reveals that infrastructure systems are 
interconnected through a web of external dependencies. Additionally, within a given system (i.e., an 
individual service provider) operations are dependent on a similar web of internal dependencies. Failure 
of a single critical system component can result in cascading failures within an individual system, as in 
the case of lost electrical power to an estimated 50 million people in the 2003 Northeast Blackout [NERC 
2004]. External dependencies can also lead to cascading failures of other infrastructure systems, as in the 
shutdown of train service in and out of New York City and loss of cell sites after batteries were drained in 
the 2003 Northeast Blackout. 
Internal Dependency. Within a given system, certain components are critical to the successful operation 
of the system. An example of a critical component in a water system is a pump that delivers water to a 
water tower to distribute onto customers by gravity feed. If the pump stops working, then customers in the 
pressure zone served by that pump are without water  unless there is redundancy built into the system. 
This pump example represents an infrastructure-related dependency internal to a single water utility. In 
addition to physical infrastructure-related internal dependencies, each infrastructure system depends on a 
number of other factors, such as workforce availability, to sustain normal operations.  
Figure 11-1 shows an example of internal and external dependencies for emergency services [Pederson et 
al. 2006]. Solid lines that connect nodes within each service, as indicated by the lined boxes, represent 
internal dependencies. The dashed lines represent external dependencies between emergency services and 
supporting infrastructure systems. For instance, delivery of ambulance, fire, and police services all 
depend on telecommunications and roads. Identifying and understanding internal and external 
dependencies and potential cascading effects provides an informed basis for setting performance goals for 
community response and recovery. 
Infrastructure systems are typically dependent on other external systems for continued successful 
operation. The water pump described above is dependent on electrical power for operation; therefore, it is 
dependent on the energy system that is external to the water system. The pump may be able to operate for 
a short period with an emergency generator, but the generator would be dependent on refueling during an 
extended power outage. Refueling is, in turn, dependent on an available supply of fuel and a 
transportation system to deliver the fuel.  
40 
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects, Dimensions of Dependency 
 
Solid lines that connect nodes within each service, as indicated by the lined boxes, represent internal dependencies. 
Dashed lines represent external dependencies between emergency services and supporting infrastructure systems. 
For instance, delivery of ambulance, fire, and police services all depend on telecommunications and roads. 
Figure 11-1. Example of infrastructure internal and external dependencies for emergency services 
[Source: Pederson et al. 2006].  
External Dependency. Figure 11-2 illustrates other examples of interdependent relationships among 
infrastructure systems. These relationships can be characterized by multiple connections among 
infrastructure systems. The behavior of a given infrastructure system may be initially evaluated in 
isolation from other infrastructure systems, but planning for resilience requires understanding of the 
integrated performance of the physical infrastructure. Wang [2014] conducted a specific study that 
evaluates the interdependencies of a hospital and the supporting infrastructure that illustrates this topic.  
Cascading Effects. Internal dependency-related cascading failures can affect power transmission, 
computer networking, mechanical and structural systems, and communication systems. External 
dependency-related cascading failures can affect all buildings and systems. Figure 11-3 and Figure 11-4 
illustrate how internal and external dependencies caused cascading failures in the 2003 Northeast 
Blackout. The Blackout resulted in widespread societal and economic disruption. It started when an 
electricity generating plant went offline, and took less than three hours to propagate across an area with a 
population of some 50 million. The outage impacted buildings and other power-dependent infrastructure 
systems, including transportation, energy, communication, and water [NERC 2004]. Failures in physical 
infrastructure can also have cascading impacts on social institutions. For example, prolonged loss of 
critical services following a disaster may drive small businesses to relocate or go out of business entirely. 
41 
 
  
 
Volume II 
 
-Rinaldi et al 2001]
 
 and redrawn, 
 [Adapted
s
Dimensions of Dependency 
, 
42
Dependencies and Cascading Effects
. Example of external dependency relationship
2
-
 11
Figure 
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects, Dimensions of Dependency 
 
Figure 11-3: Power system internal dependence cascading failure in the 2003 Northeast Blackout 
  
Figure 11-4: External dependence cascading failure in the 2003 Northeast Blackout 
External dependencies among various infrastructure systems that serve other systems means that 
infrastructure services need to be restored in sequence. For example, the roads that lead to the electrical 
system components that serve the water system that needs repair must be cleared to create access for 
repair crews. Such dependency could lead to significant cascading delay in restoring critical services. For 
example, delays in restoration of liquid fuel could impact restoration of roads and bridges. Delays in 
restoration of roads could impact transport of repair crews, equipment, and restoration of the electric 
power system which, in turn, could impact restoration of water services.  
43 
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects, Dimensions of Dependency 
11.2.2. Time  
Recovery Phases. After a hazard event, the time required to restore services depends on how rapidly 
supporting infrastructure systems recover. Rail transportation systems, such as the Bay Area Rapid 
Transit (BART) system in the San Francisco Bay area, require electrical power for operation. No matter 
how resilient the rail infrastructure system, recovery of service depends on restoration of electrical power. 
There may also be operational dependencies that impact a utility providers ability to perform repairs. 
Crews typically rely on roads and bridges to access repair sites, liquid fuel for trucks and equipment, 
cellular phones for communication, availability of repair supplies through the supply chain, etc. 
Disruption in any one or a combination of these systems can increase delays in recovery of service. 
The Guide organizes the community resilience plan around three phases of recovery using four categories 
of building clusters (see Chapter 4 in Volume I). The nature of the dependency issues differs for each 
phase. The first phase, focused on immediate response and labeled short-term, is expected to last for 
days. This phase requires critical facilities and provisions for emergency housing. The second, 
intermediate recovery phase, is expected to last for weeks to months. The second phase can include 
restoration of housing and neighborhood services, such as retail, healthcare, and schools. The third, long-
term recovery phase, is expected to last from months to years and focuses on full recovery of the 
communitys economic and social base. 
Short-Term Recovery Phase. During the short-term phase (days), the normal operation of infrastructure 
systems may be impaired. Individual system operators will activate their emergency response plans. 
Internal dependencies (such as staff, operations center, data, repair supplies, etc.) and key external 
dependencies (such as transportation) will be critical in defining the pace of the initial response. A well-
defined governance process, between and among government emergency managers and system providers, 
will be essential to coordinate system restoration priorities that are best for the community, especially 
when the recommended restoration sequence might not be optimal for an individual system provider. A 
report by the City and County of San Francisco Lifelines Council indicated that a top planning and 
preparedness priority for system providers is to develop communication and employ priority decision-
making strategies to aid in post-event response [The Lifelines Council, City and County of San Francisco 
2014]. 
Critical facilities, as defined in Chapter 4 (Volume I), are a small number of building clusters and 
supporting infrastructure systems that need to be functional immediately after an event to support the 
emergency response and provide a safe environment for emergency responders. During this early phase, 
the degree of dependence on other infrastructure systems depends on the facilitys ability to operate with 
emergency power, an independent communication network, and possibly onsite housing and subsistence 
for the staff. Critical transportation routes need to be established prior to the event and made a high 
priority in post-event cleanup and debris removal. These routes enable replenishment of onsite supplies 
including fuel, water, food, medical supplies, etc. Performance goals for recovery need to balance the 
supplies needed to operate independently for a short period and achievable restoration times. 
For example, some hospitals have stored water that can supply drinking water for three to four days. This 
supply may represent about 5 % of total water usage. Some hospitals total water usage may exceed 
300,000 gal/day. Many hospitals do not have onsite storage capacity for wastewater and have limited 
storage capacity for medical waste. Such limitations would impair hospital functionality after a hazard 
event. In California, the Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development is implementing 
requirements to provide three days of an operational supply of water (including water for drinking, food 
preparation, sterilization, HVAC cooling towers, etc.), wastewater storage, and fuel for emergency 
generators [CBC 2013]. 
The timing of a hazard event may also impact the resources available for response. Availability of 
hospital beds is often seasonally dependent. For instance, during the winter flu season, hospitals may 
44 
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects, Dimensions of Dependency 
operate at or near capacity, limiting the number of patient beds available for response (even after 
discharge of less critical patients and canceling elective procedures). 
Temporary housing for emergency responders and displaced individuals and animals, as discussed in 
Chapter 10, is often met by using schools, shelters, hotels, conference centers, residences that are safe to 
shelter-in-place, etc. Food, water, security, and sanitation needed to protect public health are usually 
provided at centralized locations.  
An inability to provide sufficient emergency housing can lead to a mass exodus from the community, 
which could cascade into a permanent loss of residents and inability to restore the economic base of the 
community. Performance goals need to realistically estimate both the number of displaced residents and 
emergency responders to be accommodated and the availability of adequate facilities within or adjacent to 
the community. 
Intermediate Recovery Phase. In the intermediate recovery phase (weeks to months), the dependency 
focus is expected to shift more to external dependencies (electricity, liquid fuel, transportation, etc.) along 
with key internal dependencies (funding for payroll and repair supplies, contractors, etc.). 
Restoring neighborhood functionality is key to maintaining the workforce needed to restore the economic 
vitality of the community after a hazard event. During this period, it is important that special attention be 
paid to the needs of the disadvantaged and at-risk populations who require a higher level of assistance. 
Functioning residences, schools, healthcare facilities, and businesses are needed to give the population 
confidence to stay and help support community recovery. If people cannot return to their neighborhoods, 
small neighborhood businesses will likely lose their client base and relocate or close. This, in turn, may 
cascade into delays for recovering the communitys economy or permanent losses. See Section 10.5 for 
additional social institution dependencies.  
Commercial services also support recovery of a community. If the primary economic engine of a region is 
based on a manufacturing plant that requires water, wastewater, and power to operate within two weeks 
after a design hazard event, then the intermediate recovery phase should address restoration of those 
dependent systems.  
The condition of the built environment that supports residences, neighborhoods, and businesses is one key 
factor that determines recovery time. Significant structural damage to buildings and infrastructure systems 
cannot be repaired within a few weeks; it takes months or longer, depending on the damage. Buildings 
need to be safe to use while being repaired for minor damage or temporary facilities will need to be 
provided, especially for damaged residences. The components of the transportation, energy, water, 
wastewater, and communication systems that support these facilities need to be restored within the same 
timeframe.  
Long-Term Recovery Phase. In the long-term recovery phase (months to years), it is anticipated that 
utility services will be restored, at least with temporary fixes. If a community is in the early stages of 
developing its resilience, the recovery time may take longer due to needed repairs or rebuilding. As a 
community achieves resilience, a similar event should cause less damage and have shorter, less costly 
recovery times. The key dependencies at this point are related to supplies, equipment, and resource 
availability for repairs and reconstruction. 
Construction activities to repair and rebuild after major event will provide a significant, short-term 
stimulus to the economy and offer an opportunity to improve the built environment according to a 
communitys plan for resilience. The restoration may be financed by the government, insurance 
companies, large businesses, private savings, and/or developers. For the recovery process to successfully 
improve community resilience, a governance structure needs to be in place that approves reconstruction 
rapidly and in accordance with the communitys interests and resilience plans. Any stall or stalemate in 
decision-making will delay the construction activities needed to restart the economy. 
45 
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects, Dimensions of Dependency 
It is important that communities develop a resilience plan that addresses how to manage the logistics of 
recovery. For example, logistics include expedited building permit processes and adequate resources for 
building inspections during a post-event construction boom. Logistics also include land use planning 
decisions that will guide rebuilding. If the process is delayed, then people and businesses may move out 
of the region and the opportunity to build back a better, more resilient community is lost. The Oregon 
Resilience Plan indicated that businesses are only able to accommodate approximately two to four weeks 
of business interruption before they would need to relocate or go out of business [OSSPAC 2013]. This is 
particularly troubling to a state like Oregon where a large portion of the economy relies on small 
businesses and where the current expected level of resilience for a Cascadia Subduction Zone earthquake 
does not meet this four-week time window. Japan experienced small business losses because of delayed 
decisions in land use planning to rebuild in the tsunami-impacted region after the 2011 Tohoku 
earthquake [Mochizuki 2014]. 
11.2.3. Space  
Hazard Impact Region. Hazard events can have variable impacts across affected regions. Hurricanes or a 
Cascadia Subduction Zone earthquake may impact a large multi-state region, while tornadoes may only 
impact a portion of a community.  
Communities need to consider the potential geographic area of impact for their expected hazards as part 
of the planning process. The Oregon Resilience Plan [OSSPAC 2013] was developed for a scenario 
Cascadia Subduction Zone earthquake that would likely impact a region including Northern California, 
Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia (Figure 11-5). The plan discusses a strategy where the central 
and eastern portions of the state would provide assistance to the Willamette Valley/I-5 Corridor region 
(area including the states largest population centers) and then the Willamette Valley/I-5 Corridor would 
provide assistance to the coastal region. Other mutual aid assistance would likely be mobilized from 
Idaho, Montana, and other adjacent states. This is in contrast to a Midwest tornado, which may cause 
significant devastation to a particular community, but assistance in response and recovery is available 
from the surrounding communities. 
Location of Critical Infrastructure. The location of physical infrastructure within a community impacts 
how it is expected to perform in a hazard event. For example, wastewater treatment plants are often 
located close to rivers, bays, or other bodies of water for system operation reasons, making them 
particularly vulnerable to flooding, sea level rise, and tsunami hazards. In the resilience planning process, 
communities need to consider how the prevailing hazards and location of existing infrastructure systems 
impacts system performance. Resilience plans could include land use planning policies that consider the 
dependence between physical location and system performance, when evaluating upgrades to existing 
buildings, construction of new infrastructure systems, and rebuilding after a hazard event. 
Co-location. Infrastructure systems are often co-located along transportation or other utility corridors. 
The close proximity of these different systems can lead to unintended damage to these co-located systems 
[ORourke 2007].  
46 
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects, Dimensions of Dependency 
 
Figure 11-5: Four impact zones for M9.0 Cascadia earthquake scenario [Source: OSSPAC 2013] 
Pipelines and conduits are often co-located 
on bridges or other crossing structures and 
can be significantly impacted by earthquake 
and inundation (flood and tsunami) events. 
Figure 11-6 shows an example of bridge 
displacement during the 2011 Christchurch 
New Zealand earthquake. A sewer pipeline, 
supported by the bridge, failed and spilled 
raw sewage into the river below. The new 
black sewer line on the bridge deck was 
temporarily installed after the earthquake.  
Telecommunications wires are often 
supported by electrical power poles, so if the 
pole breaks, both systems are impacted. 
Water and wastewater pipelines are often co-
located near other buried infrastructure under  
or adjacent to roadways. Failure of pipelines Figure 11-6: Example of infrastructure co-location 
may result in damage to the roadway (i.e. 
sinkhole from water main break or collapsed 
sewer pipeline) and impacts to traffic when repairs are being made. Co-located infrastructure not only 
results in potential damage to multiple systems, but also often requires significantly more coordination 
between service providers during repair.  
47 
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects, Planning for Infrastructure System Dependencies 
11.2.4. Source Dependency 
Communities depend on goods and services that may or may not be available locally. Hazard events that 
impact the source of these goods and services can have far-reaching downstream consequences. 
In the Pacific Northwest, Oregon is 
dependent on refineries in the State of 
Washington for a supply of liquid fuel. 
Figure 11-7 shows the Portland, OR liquid 
fuel tank farm that relies on pipelines 
running from just south of the Canadian 
border to this storage site. A Cascadia 
Subduction Zone earthquake would likely 
disrupt refinery operation and limit available 
liquid fuel supplies in Washington and 
Oregon. If not identified and addressed, this  
could cripple restoration of roads and 
bridges, which, in turn, would paralyze Figure 11-7: Portland, OR liquid fuel tank farm is 
restoration of electric power and water vulnerable to failures in pipelines in Washington State. 
services. Similarly, a Gulf Coast hurricane (Source: Yumei Wang [DOGAMI 2012] 
could damage offshore drilling platforms 
and oil refinery facilities, disrupting the 
liquid fuel supply for the hurricane-impacted region and other regions of the U.S. 
Regional utility systems provide another example of source dependency. The Tennessee Valley Authority 
(TVA) supplies power to over 150 municipal utility companies and several large industrial users in 
Alabama, Kentucky, Mississippi, and Tennessee [TVA 2014]. A hazard event, such as an ice storm, that 
damages one or more TVA power generation facilities or transmission lines has the potential to disrupt 
electric power over a large geographic area. 
A wildfire can impact the drinking water supply with high post-fire sediment loads. These sediment loads 
can damage reservoirs and treatment plants, resulting in increased treatment costs to remove suspended 
solids from drinking water. The impact of sediment is highest in the burned area, but data from the 
Southern California wildfires in the fall of 2003 indicated increased sediment loads at treatment plants up 
to 160 km (100 miles) from the fire [Meixner and Wohlgemuth 2004]. 
11.3. Planning for Infrastructure System Dependencies  
As part of the planning process, utility providers, businesses, and other community organizations should 
be encouraged to refresh or develop their own emergency and continuity of operations plans and address 
internal dependencies. As organizations are conducting internal planning activities to achieve resilience, 
they can compile a list of external dependencies and how they may impact their operations and recovery 
process. With informed stakeholders, a discussion can be held that develops an understanding of the 
desired and anticipated performance of the built environment for prevailing hazards, including 
dependencies.  
Understanding the dependencies within and between physical infrastructure systems is a developing area 
of planning related to resilience and recovery from significant disruptions. However, there is an 
immediate need for a process to identify dependencies in the built environment, and an empirical method 
based on historical data seems to be the most achievable at this point. Such a method was used for the 
City and County of San Francisco Lifelines Council in 2013 and it may be applied to other communities. 
San Francisco reported their findings and recommendations (Figure 11-8) in February 2014 [The 
Lifelines Council, City and County of San Francisco 2014]. The steps in their process were: 
48 
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects, Planning for Infrastructure System Dependencies 
 
Figure 11-8: Potential service restoration timeframes following a scenario M 7.9 earthquake on the 
San Andreas Fault estimated in City of San Francisco Study 
x Form a service provider council of private and public infrastructure owners and plan a quarterly 
forum for them to meet, share current planning activities, and discuss response and recovery 
issues, their dependencies on other systems, and methods to improve the existing conditions. 
x For the extreme level of all prevailing hazards, characterize the expected level of damage in terms 
related to infrastructure system performance from the view of the infrastructure provider. Figure 
11-8 illustrates restoration times estimated by the providers in the San Francisco study. While 
most utilities get progressively better over time, the loss of battery power and fuel in the first few 
days causes the decrease in service restoration for some systems. Once electricity is restored, the 
service restoration of other infrastructure systems increases, some more rapidly than others. 
x For each infrastructure system, document the planned response and restoration process, likely 
dependencies on other systems, and the understanding of other system dependencies on them.  
x Process the information and determine overall interactions between systems and the related 
dependencies. Identify areas with potential for cascading effects, occurrences of co-location, 
overlaps, and hindrances related to restoration and recovery plans. Table 11-1 illustrates the 
dependencies identified in the San Francisco Study, as well as the nature of the interaction.  
x Develop a series of recommendations related to the next steps needed to better define the needs, 
advance collaborative planning where needed, prioritize the needed mitigation projects and 
identify funding sources for pre- and post-event needs. 
Table 11-1 lists infrastructure systems along both axis of the table. The type of dependencies and 
significance of the dependency is indicated, with significant (yellow) dependencies needing to be resolved 
first. For example, the dependency between electric power and city streets can be significant. Streets and 
power are co-located when power lines are within the right-of-way of the streets, and each system may 
hinder the restoration of the other. Roads are needed to transport the power crews and debris on the roads 
will delay repairs to the electrical system. 
49 
           
 
 
 
Fuel
General
RestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationFunctional, RestorationRestorationFunctional, Restoration
     
  
 
      
AirportGeneral
RestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationRestoration
a scenario M7.9 
]
     
    
 
 
    
Portlocation, locationlocationlocation
----location, location, location, 
---
General
  
 following CoRestorationCoCoCoCoRestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationRestoration
 
     
 
   
Volume II 
        
-
location,location, location
---location, 
-
TransitGeneral
Substitute
CoRestorationCoCoCoRestoration
Lifelines Council 2014
         
 
- 
   
System Dependencies
 location, location, location, location, location, location
WasteWater------
General
RestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationCoRestoration
      
  
     propagation among infrastructure systems
location, location, location, location, location, location
Water------
General
Auxiliary 
CoRestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationCo
 
damage 
            
  
50
location, location, location, location, location, location, 
Water------
General
RestorationFunctional, 
CoRestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationRestorationFunctional, RestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationRestorationRestoration
Planning for Infrastructure           
,   
disaster propagation and cascading interactions from one system to another due to dependenceinteraction, physical 
 interaction, various hindrances in the restoration and recovery stages
  
interaction, one systems disruption influences dependencies on alternative systems
 
Adapted from Laurie Johnson, CCSFinteraction between components of the same system. (All systems would have general interaction issues, but some 
[location, location,  
--
TelecomGeneral
RestorationCoRestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationCoRestorationRestorationRestoration
location
-
 
   
Key to terms used in the matrix:FunctionalCoRestorationSubstituteGeneralissues are more crucial for the systems potential disruption and restoration.)
identified by the City of San Franciscos Lifelines Council 
 
              
location, 
-
General
The overall interaction and dependency on a particular system (read down each column)RestorationRestoration
Natural GasCoRestoration
          
 
  
location, location, 
Power--
Electric General
Substitute
RestorationFunctional, 
CoRestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationFunctional, RestorationFunctional, RestorationFunctional, 
CoRestorationRestorationRestoration
           
system dependencies 
 
Dependencies and Cascading Effects
  
 
 
location, location, location, location, location, location,  
------
General
Substitute
City StreetsRestoration Functional, 
CoRestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationRestorationFunctional, RestorationFunctional, Substitute,
CoRestorationCoRestorationCoRestorationRestoration
           
earthquake on the San Andreas Fault  
 
: Infrastructure RoadsGeneral
1Regional Substitute 
-RestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationRestorationSubstitute, RestorationRestorationRestorationRestoration
11
 
   
    - 
    
 
Table 
 Regional RoadsCity StreetsElectric PowerNatural Gas TelecomWaterAuxiliary WaterWasteWater(read across each row) TransitPortAirportFuel
   Infrastructure System Operators dependency on other Infrastructure systems 
 Legend:Significant interaction and dependency on this infrastructure system for service delivery and restoration effortsModerate interaction and dependency on this infrastructure system for service delivery and restoration effortsLimited interaction and dependency on this infrastructure system for service delivery and restoration efforts
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects  
Figure 11-9 shows a map of Portland, Oregon with a GIS overlay of infrastructure systems that are 
contained in the Earthquake Response Appendix to the Citys Basic Emergency Operations Plan 
[Portland Bureau of Emergency Management 2012]. The city used this information to coordinate the 
potential spatial dependencies of its infrastructure sytems.  
 
Figure 11-9: GIS map of infrastructure systems around Portland, Oregon [Source: USGS] 
The Multidisciplinary Center for Earthquake Engineering Research, MCEER [Shinozuka et al. 2004], 
investigated earthquake effects on the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP) combined 
water and power systems, and showed that GIS assisted modeling could effectively illustrate the temporal 
and spatial aspects of the combined system performance. Figure 11-10 shows a pre-event simulation of 
the progression of the restoration process after a scenario event. The state of the restoration is 
demonstrated in GIS format at 0 hours, 12 hours, 24 hours, and 48 hours after the scenario earthquake. 
This type of restoration simulation is useful for assessing infrastructure system dependencies and 
develop/validate solutions for minimize cascading effects.  
51 
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects  
 
  
a. 0 hours b. 12 hours 
 
  
c. 24 hours d. 48 hours 
 Multidisciplinary Center for Earthquake Engineering Research (MCEER) at the State University of New York at Buffalo. 
Used with Permission.  
Figure 11-10: Pre-event simulation of LADWP restoration of pump stations and power supply  
52 
I  
Dependencies and Cascading Effects  
11.4. References 
California Building Standards Commission (CBC 2013) California Building Standards Code, California 
Building Standards Commission, Sacramento, CA, http://www.bsc.ca.gov/Home/Current2013Codes.aspx. 
Mexiner, T. and P. Wohlgemuth (2004) Wildfire Impacts on Water Quality, Southwest Hydrology, pp. 
24-25, September/October, http://www.swhydro.arizona.edu/archive/V3_N5/feature7.pdf. 
Mochizuki, J. (2014) Decision-Making, Policy Choices and Community Rebuilding after the Tohoku 
Disaster, Journal of Integrated Disaster Risk Management, 4 (2): 11-26. 
North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC 2004) Technical Analysis of the August 14, 2003, 
Blackout: What Happened, Why, and What Did We Learn? Princeton, NJ, North American Electric 
Reliability Council. 
ORourke, T. (2007) Critical Infrastructure, Interdependencies, and Resilience, The Bridge, vol. 37, no. 
1, Spring, National Academy of Engineering of the National Academies, Washington, DC, 
https://www.nae.edu/File.aspx?id=7405.  
Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission (OSSPAC 2013) The Oregon Resilience Plan, 
Reducing Risk and Improving Recovery for the Next Cascadia Earthquake and Tsunami, Salem, OR: 
Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission. 
Pederson, P.; D. Dudenhoeffer; S. Hartley; and M. Permann (2006) Critical Infrastructure 
Interdependency Modeling: A Survey of U.S. and International Research, INL/EXT-06-11464, Idaho 
National Laboratory. 
Portland Bureau of Emergency Management (2013) City of Portland Basic Emergency Operations Plan, 
Earthquake Response Appendix. Portland, OR, https://www.portlandoregon.gov/pbem/article/135813. 
Rinaldi, S.M.; J.P. Peerenboom; and T.K. Kelly (2001) Identifying, Understanding, and Analyzing 
Critical Infrastructure Interdependencies, IEEE Control Systems Magazine, December 
Shinozuka, M.; S.E. Chang; T-C. Cheng; M. Feng; T.D. ORourke; M. Ala Saadeghvaziri; X. Dong; X. 
Jin; Y. Wahg; and P. Shi (2004) Resilience of Integrated Power and Water Systems, Research Progress 
and Accomplishments 2003-2004, MCEER, Buffalo, NY. 
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA 2014) Tennessee Valley Authority Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2014-
2018, Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), Knoxville, TN. 
The Lifelines Council, City and County of San Francisco (2014) Lifelines Interdependency Study/Report, 
San Francisco, CA, http://www.sfgsa.org/modules/showdocument.aspx?documentid=12025. 
Wang, Y. (2014) Hospital and Water System Risk Evaluation, Report to the Oregon Health Authority, 
Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, September. 
Wang, Y.; S. Bartlett; S. and Miles (2012) Earthquake Risk Study for Oregon's Critical Energy 
Infrastructure Hub, Final Report to Oregon Department of Energy & Oregon Public Utility Commission, 
Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries, August. 
53 
I  
Buildings  
12. Buildings 
Buildings Executive Summary 
Buildings support many social needs from the most basic, such as providing shelter, to providing services 
like medical care and education. Following a disruptive hazard event, some buildings need to be 
functional immediately, while others need to remain stable to protect occupants. Building stock within a 
community varies widely, in terms of use, occupancy, ownership, age, construction type, and condition. 
These factors can affect the performance of existing buildings during hazard events, as well as the ability 
to restore their intended function within a reasonable time. 
The Guide groups buildings that have similar functions and performance goals into clusters to focus on 
the role of buildings at the community level rather than individual buildings. Accordingly, performance 
goals are expressed in terms of time to recovery of function for building clusters following a hazard event. 
Building clusters are buildings and supporting infrastructure systems that support a social need or 
function in the community that have a common performance goal. Recovery of function is affected by the 
condition of the buildings and supporting infrastructure systems (including their design, mitigation, and 
maintenance) as well as damage levels, resources for repairs and rebuilding, and temporary measures, 
such as interim power sources. Functionality across a building cluster may be restored incrementally 
during recovery phases. For example, critical facilities like emergency care centers in hospitals are needed 
immediately following hazard events. Other less critical hospital functions can be restored as needed. 
Another example is residential clusters that need to be stable and safe for occupancy immediately after the 
event, so residents can remain in the community to support its recovery.  
The community resilience plan addresses gaps between the desired (future) performance of buildings to 
support recovery of function and the anticipated (current) performance of the existing building stock and 
supporting infrastructure systems. Much of the building stock may not meet the desired performance 
goals. A community resilience plan can address gaps between the desired and anticipated performance 
with prioritized solutions and strategies. For example, updated or improved codes and standards can be 
adopted. This approach has limited short and intermediate term impact because existing buildings and 
infrastructure systems are replaced slowly in most communities. Only new construction or significant 
renovations will conform to the new standards. When existing buildings pose a substantial risk to 
occupants during a hazard event, retrofit requirements are an option, but often a challenging one, due to 
potential costs and occupant disruption. 
The Guide encourages communities to consider multiple hazard levels: routine, design, and extreme. 
Consideration of multiple hazard levels supports fuller understanding of potential consequences and 
recovery actions for community resilience. The performance of buildings is anchored around the design 
hazard. For a design hazard event, desired performance could be that buildings are functional within days 
to weeks, depending on their role in the community. For a routine hazard event, desired performance 
could be that all buildings are functional within a few days. For an extreme hazard event, desired 
performance could be that certain critical facilities are functional after the event, most residents can 
shelter in their own homes, and businesses essential for recovery are open within several weeks.  
Most of the building codes and standards adopted by communities are based on model building codes. 
Model building codes are developed at the national or international level and primarily address minimum 
requirements for life safety of occupants, not comprehensive community resilience. States and local 
municipalities may modify the model building codes to achieve specific goals that are more stringent for 
local or regional hazards. Other states and localities adopt model building codes, but amend or remove 
requirements to make them less stringent. Other states adopt model building codes but do not allow 
amendments by local jurisdictions. 
54 
I  
Buildings  
Enforcing building codes and construction standards is as important as their adoption. Even if the most 
up-to-date building code and standards are in effect, buildings designed and constructed in a substandard 
manner are likely to have substandard performance. The level of enforcement can significantly impact 
resilience. A properly trained building department to review designs for code conformance and inspect 
construction for conformance with the approved plans is an essential component of community resilience.  
Making a community more resilient is a long-term proposition. Communities can develop short, medium 
and long-term goals for resilience. Short-term goals typically include creating a resilience plan and 
adopting improved building codes and standards. Short-term goals support long-term goals by gradually 
adding more resilient buildings. Medium and long-term goals typically relate to improving the existing 
building stock, such as incentivized or mandated retrofit of specific building types.  
All solutions that make communities more resilient have associated costs. Communities need to balance 
resilience plans against their available resources. The Guide offers a six-step method to identify gaps 
between desired and anticipated performance and prioritize solutions to address the gaps. Prioritization 
and participation by all stakeholders helps communities develop plans that can achieve their community 
resilience goals within their means.  
12.1. Introduction 
Community building stock can vary widely. Differences in occupancy, use, age, and condition can present 
challenges in meeting desired performance goals. Public and private ownership can also present 
challenges in implementing resilience solutions and strategies. This chapter discusses building categories 
and functions, performance goals, regulatory environment, codes and standards, and possible solutions 
and strategies for buildings that support community resilience.  
12.1.1. Social Needs and Systems Performance Goals 
Buildings play a central role in our communities, as they fulfill a multitude of social needs from providing 
shelter to providing locations for services such as health care, education, and grocery stores, as discussed 
in Chapter 10. Therefore, desired performance goals for buildings depend specifically on what the 
building houses or the function it serves. Some buildings should be functional immediately, or soon after, 
the hazard event, while other buildings need to be stable so they do not collapse or place the life safety of 
the occupants at risk. Section 12.2 discusses building categories and uses; Section 12.3 provides guidance 
for developing performance goals based on the methodology in Chapter 4 (Volume I). Current building 
codes adopted and enforced by the community may not achieve the desired performance goals.  
12.1.2. Reliability vs. Resilience 
Buildings are an integrated set of systems  structural, architectural, utilities, etc.  that perform together 
to serve the intended function of the building. Structural systems provide a stable frame that carries 
gravity loads and resists forces imposed by hazard events. Architectural systems supply protection from 
outside elements through the cladding systems (e.g., roof, exterior walls or panels, doors, windows), life 
safety systems (e.g., sprinklers, fire alarms), and interior finishes. Utility systems deliver services that 
support the building function and occupants (e.g., electric power, communication, water, wastewater). 
Buildings are designed based on provisions in building codes and engineering design standards to meet 
their intended purpose and provide occupant safety for fires and prevailing hazard events. Most 
provisions in building codes and standards are prescriptive (i.e., rules or regulations are specified for 
design). However, most codes and standards also permit the use of alternative products, systems or design 
55 
I  
Buildings  
methods if equivalent performance is demonstrated through engineering analysis, testing, or performance-
based design.  
Structural systems are typically designed for the required minimum level of hazard intensity, which is 
based on a target performance level based on reliability for a 50 year service period (see Chapter 4 in 
Volume 1). Structural reliability refers to the probability that a structural member or system will not fail 
during the service period in a specified fashion, such as member buckling or fracture. For gravity, wind, 
snow, and flood design loads, structural design is based on member performance, so that structural 
members are designed to have a low probability of failure during a design hazard event. For seismic 
design hazard events, structures are designed for system performance, where the structural system is 
expected to remain stable, but individual members may fail. Thus, for wind, snow, and flood events, a 
structure is expected to sustain little or no damage during a design event. For seismic events, the structure 
is expected to remain stable but localized structural damage may occur. Depending on the degree of 
damage, a building may not be functional afterwards and may even need to be demolished.  
Hazard events may disrupt services, such as water and electric power, which are required for building 
functionality. If water pressure cannot be maintained, then fire hydrants, fire suppression, and sanitary 
systems are out of service, and buildings may not be suitable for occupancy.  
Designing a building that supports its role in a resilient community requires understanding the social 
functions that building supports in the community, and the building performance needed to ensure those 
functions during or after a hazard event. Some requirements for resilience may exceed those required by 
model building codes and standards. 
12.1.3. Dependencies 
A communitys resilience strongly depends on the performance of its buildings. The functionality of most 
buildings, in turn, depends on services provided by utilities (e.g., energy, communication, water, and 
wastewater) and transportation systems. Conversely, some buildings support the utility systems.  
Community resilience requires that dependencies between buildings and supporting infrastructure systems 
have compatible performance goals to achieve the desired performance. For example, emergency 
operation centers and hospitals are needed during and immediately after a hazard event. However, 
supporting power and water infrastructure systems may be damaged. To support community needs during 
short-term recovery, critical facilities need to plan to operate without external power and water until those 
services are expected to be recovered. Alternatively, the functionality of specific buildings can depend on 
the occupants as well. First responders need accessible routes to reach the buildings where equipment is 
housed to provide emergency services.  
12.2. Building Categories and Functions  
Design and construction criteria in building codes and standards are organized according to the desired 
performance of the building, based on its intended use, occupancy, and public health, safety, and welfare 
considerations. Many buildings are designed according to the building occupancy classifications in the 
International Building Code [IBC 2015] and the National Fire Protection Association codes [NFPA 
2015], and the risk categories in the American Society of Civil Engineers Standard 7 [ASCE 2010].  
The term occupancy in building codes refers to the nature of the activities that occur inside the 
buildings; fire and life safety provisions are based on the activities. Occupancy classifications can include 
assembly, business, day care, education, factory/industrial, high hazard, institutional, mercantile, 
residential, storage, utility, and miscellaneous. 
56 
I  
Buildings  
Risks associated with structural failure are addressed separately by risk categories, which relate 
exceeding the design loads and associated criteria to the consequence of failure for the structure and its 
occupants. Risk categories are distinct from occupancy groups in building codes. Risk categories reflect a 
progression of the anticipated seriousness of the consequence of failure from lowest risk (Risk Category 
I) to the highest (Risk Category IV). Buildings and other structures are assigned the highest applicable 
risk category based on the risk to human life, health, and welfare associated with their damage or failure 
by nature of their occupancy or use [ASCE/SEI 2010].  
Risk categories are shown in Table 12-1. Risk Category II includes the majority of building types, such as 
residential, commercial, and industrial buildings, as well as all other buildings not designated to the other 
risk categories. Essential buildings fall under Risk Category IV, which requires the highest level of 
reliability. In ASCE/SEI [2010], essential buildings are intended to remain operational in the event of an 
extreme flood, wind, snow, or earthquake event. Some buildings that a community may deem as essential 
are classified as Risk Category III, which includes buildings and structures that house a large number of 
people in one place or those people with limited mobility or ability to travel to a safe haven, including 
healthcare facilities, elementary schools, and prisons. This category also includes structures associated 
with utilities that protect the health and safety of a community, including power-generating stations and 
water and sewage treatment plants. Risk Category III requires a higher level of reliability than Risk 
Category II. Minimum design loads for structures are modified by importance factors for each risk 
category. 
Table 12-1: Risk categories for buildings [ASCE/SEI 2010] 
Risk Category Definition 
I. Buildings and other structures that represent low risk to human life in the event of failure. 
II. All buildings and other structures except those listed in Risk Categories I, III, and IV. 
III. Buildings and other structures, the failure of which could pose a substantial risk to human life in 
the event of failure. 
Buildings and other structures, not included in Risk Category IV, with potential to cause a 
substantial economic impact and/or mass disruption of day-to-day civilian life in the event of 
failure. 
Buildings and other structures not included in Risk Category IV (including, but not limited to, 
facilities that manufacture, process, handle, store, use, or dispose of such substances as hazardous 
fuels, hazardous chemicals, hazardous waste, or explosives) containing toxic or explosive 
substances where the quantity of the material exceeds a threshold quantity established by the 
authority having jurisdiction and is sufficient to pose a threat to the public if released. 
IV. Buildings and other structures designated as essential facilities. 
Buildings and other structures, the failure of which could pose a substantial hazard to the 
community. 
Buildings and other structures (including, but not limited to, facilities that manufacture, process, 
handle, store, use, or dispose of such substances as hazardous fuels, hazardous chemicals, or 
hazardous waste) containing sufficient quantities of highly toxic substances where the quantity of 
the material exceeds a threshold quantity established by the authority having jurisdiction and is 
sufficient to pose a threat to the public if released. 
Buildings and other structures required to maintain the functionality of other Risk Category IV 
structures. 
57 
I  
Buildings  
Building use and occupancy classifications and risk categories are important parameters for design, but do 
not address a key aspect of resilience: time to recovery of function. Four building performance categories 
that address recovery are defined in Table 12-2. The reference to tags in Table 12-2 are based on a 
methodology established initially for building safety inspections following earthquakes, but is also used 
following other hazard events to evaluate structures [ATC 2003]. A red tag indicates severe structural 
damaged such that it will likely need to be replaced and is unsafe for occupancy. Similarly, a yellow tag is 
used for buildings that are significantly damaged and occupancy of the building will be delayed until it is 
repaired. A green tag means has minimal to no damage and can be occupied while minor repairs are 
made. 
Table 12-2: Performance level definitions for building clusters 
Performance Level Definition 
A. Safe and These facilities incur minor damage and continue to function without interruption. 
operational Essential facilities need this level of function. 
B. Safe and usable These facilities experience moderate damage to their interior finishes, contents and 
during repair support systems. They receive green tags when inspected and are safe to occupy after a 
hazard event. This performance is suitable for shelter-in-place residential buildings, 
neighborhood businesses and services, and other businesses or services deemed important 
to community recovery. 
C. Safe and not These facilities meet minimum safety goals, but are not otherwise functional, and remain 
usable  closed until they are repaired. These facilities receive yellow tags. This performance may 
be suitable for some of the facilities that support the communitys economy. Demand for 
business and market factors will determine how soon they need to be functional. 
D. Unsafe  partial or These facilities are dangerous because the extent of damage make occupancy unsafe. 
complete collapse These buildings receive red tags. 
The following sections discuss performance considerations for various building clusters. Performance 
goals are set during the resilience planning process (Chapter 4, Volume 1) and summarized in the 
performance goals table as discussed in Section 12.3. 
There is no established correlation between performance categories and risk categories, although 
communities can consider them together for resilience planning. For instance, a building cluster designed 
to Risk Category IV criteria may be designated to have Category A performance during recovery. 
Achieving such performance will require understanding of the design and maintenance of individual 
buildings within the cluster.  
12.2.1. Government 
In most communities, emergency operations centers, first responder facilities, airports, prisons, and water 
and wastewater treatment facilities are government-owned buildings. These buildings provide essential 
services, shelter occupants, and shelter equipment that supports essential services. Therefore, essential 
buildings should remain operational, as defined by Category A (safe and operational).  
Other government buildings may not need to be functional immediately following a hazard event (e.g., 
City Hall or county administrative building, public schools, mass transit stations and garages, judicial 
courts, and community centers). However, these buildings may be needed during the intermediate 
58 
I  
Buildings  
recovery phase. An appropriate performance goal for these types of buildings might be either Category A 
(safe and operational) or Category B (safe and usable during repair), depending on their role in the 
community recovery plan.  
12.2.2. Health Care  
Emergency medical facilities are critical to response and recovery efforts. Therefore hospitals, essential 
health care facilities, and their supporting infrastructure, should be functional (Category A) during and 
following a hazard event. While the entire facility may not need to be fully operational, critical functions, 
such as the emergency room and life support systems, should be operational as other functions are 
restored. Hospitals are designed to Risk Category IV requirements. Some local communities or federal 
agencies impose additional requirements. For example, California requires that all hospital designs, 
regardless of location or ownership (municipal or private), be reviewed and construction overseen by a 
state agency, in addition to review by local building officials.  
Nursing homes and residential treatment facilities that house patients who cannot care for themselves 
should be functional immediately after a hazard event. Communities can determine which subset of 
doctors offices, pharmacies for access to medicines, and outpatient clinics for dialysis or other urgent, 
ongoing treatments will also be need to remain functional. Some medical office buildings and pharmacies 
may need to be designed to perform to Performance Category A or B, depending on their role in 
community recovery and resilience. In most cases, buildings for these types of medical offices are 
currently designed as Risk Category II buildings.  
12.2.3. Schools and Daycare Centers 
Many schools (K-12) are designed to a higher performance level (Risk Category III) because they house 
large assemblies of children. Additionally, school gymnasiums or other areas often are designated as 
emergency shelters during hazard events. Schools may also be designated as emergency staging areas 
after a hazard event. Additionally, the SPUR [2009] Resilience City Initiative found that when children 
return to day care and school, the community is perceived as returning to normal and parents can return to 
work. Thus, expeditious resumption of function is important for schools across a community.  
There can be a mix of performance requirements for schools or other designated buildings. For normal 
use, a school may be designed for Risk Category III and Performance Category B. However, if the school 
or some portion of the school is used as an emergency shelter, that requires Risk Category A 
performance. Depending on the hazard, the Risk Category III provisions to which most primary schools 
are designed may provide Performance Category A or B performance. Therefore, any school designated 
as an emergency shelter should be evaluated to ensure it is appropriately designed for its intended use.  
Higher education facilities are generally regulated as business (Risk Category II) or assembly (Risk 
Category III) occupancies with exceptions for specific uses, such as laboratory and other research uses. 
Research universities may be concerned with protecting their research facilities, long-term experiments, 
associated specimens and data. However, such facilities may not have been initially designed for 
protection of data and specimens during hazard events, or timely recovery of function.  
Daycare centers house young children that require mobility assistance and are unable to make decisions, 
but daycare populations may not meet assembly requirements of Risk Category III. Therefore, such 
centers may be located in buildings that meet Risk Category II requirements. In some communities, there 
are additional requirements for daycare occupancies; in other instances there are few constraints beyond 
basic code requirements for Risk Category II buildings. Communities may decide to require that daycare 
centers be designed to a higher level of performance, similar to school buildings.  
59 
I  
Buildings  
12.2.4. Religious and Spiritual Centers 
Religious and spiritual centers play a special role in communities. They can offer a safe haven for people 
with emotional distress following a hazard event. Often, these buildings play a role in post-event 
recovery. Many religious organizations operate charity networks that provide supplies to people following 
a hazard event. In past disasters, many religious institutions opened their doors to provide temporary 
housing. Newer buildings may be designed as Risk Category II or III buildings. These buildings can also 
be among the oldest in a community, and built with materials and construction methods that perform 
poorly in hazard events.  
If these facilities fill an important role in the community recovery plan, Performance Category B would 
be desired. However, a number of factors could influence their role in community recovery. First, most of 
these institutions are nonprofit entities, with little funding for infrastructure improvement. Second, many 
that are historic buildings would have to be modified to meet desired performance goals. Therefore, a 
community should understand the anticipated performance of its religious and spiritual centers and their 
role in community recovery.  
12.2.5. Residential and Hospitality 
Communities should consider whether residential buildings and neighborhoods will shelter a significant 
portion of the population following a hazard event. Houses, apartment buildings, and condominiums need 
not be fully functional, like a hospital or emergency operation center, but they should safely house 
occupants to support recovery and re-opening of businesses and schools. However, higher performance 
goals should be developed for facilities that house vulnerable residents, such as nursing homes and senior 
living centers. A house or apartment may be without power or water for a reasonable period of time (e.g. 
days to 1-2 weeks), but can be safely occupied. The significant destruction of neighborhoods and the 
supporting built environment led to the migration of a significant portion of the population following 
Hurricane Katrinas impact on New Orleans [Plyer 2015]. Such a shelter-in-place performance level is 
key to the SPUR [2009] Resilient City initiative and prompted the City of San Francisco to mandate a 
retrofit ordinance for vulnerable multi-family housing.  
Currently, multi-unit residential structures are typically designed to Risk Category II provisions, except 
where the number of occupants is quite large (e.g., > 5,000 people); then the designs should meet Risk 
Category III criteria. For multi-family residential structures, there are two dominant construction types: 
light frame (wood and cold-formed steel) construction and structural (hot rolled) steel or reinforced 
concrete construction. Light frame residential structures have different performance issues than structural 
steel or reinforced concrete buildings, which are typically larger.  
Most new one and two-family dwellings are constructed in accordance with the International Residential 
Code [IRC 2015]. The prescriptive provisions of the IRC are mostly consistent with those required for a 
Risk Category II building. One- and two-family dwellings constructed in accordance with a building code 
have generally performed well in earthquakes at the routine or design hazard level. In some cases, such as 
the Loma Prieta and Northridge earthquakes, one and two-family dwellings performed as well as or better 
than engineered buildings. However, their performance in design-level windstorms can be quite variable, 
depending on construction features, such as a continuous load path, type of cladding, or roof geometry.  
An effective response to some hazard events may require first responders and personnel from outside the 
community. If most residential buildings are not functional or safe to occupy, demand for temporary 
shelter for residents may compete with the need to temporarily house response and recovery workers. 
Hotels and motels can support response and recovery efforts if they are operational shortly after the event. 
Typically these buildings are designed to meet Risk Category II criteria, like multi-family residential 
structures, and may need to be evaluated for their anticipated performance if they are needed for 
community recovery. 
60 
I  
Buildings  
12.2.6. Business and Services  
While it would be ideal to have all community businesses open shortly after a hazard event, such an 
outcome may not be practical. Many business offices, retail stores, and manufacturing plants are located 
in older buildings that may not perform well during a hazard event. If constructed more recently, the 
buildings may be designed to Risk Category II criteria. However, some commercial buildings may be 
designed to higher performance levels.  
Each community should select design and recovery performance goals for its businesses and services, 
depending on their role in community recovery. Certain types of commercial buildings may be critical to 
the recovery effort. The community needs to identify businesses that are critical to community recovery 
and able to meet the desired performance level. Some businesses and services that are commonly essential 
to recovery include: 
x Grocery stores and pharmacies  People need food, water, medicine, and first aid supplies 
following a hazard event. Regional or national grocery stores and pharmacies typically have 
robust distribution networks that can replenish supplies. Although the common preparedness 
recommendation is for people to have 72 hours of food and water on hand, no assumptions should 
be made about actual adherence to this 72-hour guidance. Moreover, the potential for disruption 
beyond three days should be evaluated based on the prevalent hazard and the condition of 
buildings and physical infrastructure. For example, the Oregon Resilience Plan [OSSPAC 2013] 
recommends that people have two weeks of food and water on hand for a Cascadia earthquake 
event.  
x Banks or financial institutions  Banks or structures that house automated teller machines 
provide access to money if they have an independent power source and internet communications.  
x Hardware and home improvement stores  These businesses provide building materials for 
repairs, reconstruction, and emergency shoring of damaged buildings.  
x Gas stations and petroleum refineries  Many communities rely on automobiles and trucks for 
most transportation functions. Gasoline may be difficult to obtain for a period of time. Some 
homes and businesses may rely on emergency generators during electrical outages if they have 
fuel. A disruptive event may impact fuel delivery systems, which can be significant during cold 
weather when heating is also required.  
Buildings and other structures containing toxic or explosive substances may be classified as Risk 
Category II structures if it can be demonstrated that the risk to the public from a release of these materials 
is minimal. However, communities should verify that the risk management plan addresses community 
hazards, and any potential releases that may occur during or after a hazard event. 
The resilience needs of other types of businesses, and the buildings that house them, depend to a large 
extent on the business and communitys tolerance for those businesses to be delayed in reopening or 
closed. Many professional service businesses can rely on employees working remotely from home or 
alternate office spaces. Manufacturing, retail, and food service businesses may not have that luxury. 
Customers and their employees need to travel to their location. If a restaurant or store cannot serve the 
public or a factory is unable to manufacture its product, then the business may fail. Losing these 
businesses can adversely impact the communitys recovery and long-term resilience because of lost jobs 
and other economic impacts.  
12.2.7. Conference and Event Venues  
Convention centers, stadiums, and other large event venues can be important for the long term recovery of 
many communities because of the revenue these types of events can generate. Typically these venues are 
61 
I  
Buildings  
designed to meet Risk Category III criteria because of the large number of occupants. However, they may 
need additional improvements before being considered for temporary use as a shelter or recovery staging 
area, including requirements beyond structural considerations if they are to be used for these purposes. 
Supporting physical infrastructure systems as well as the viability of supplying food and water should be 
taken into account.  
12.2.8. Detention and Correctional Facilities 
Many communities have standalone detention centers and prisons. Building codes typically require higher 
performance and risk categories for these types of facilities because the people housed in them cannot 
evacuate without supervision. The level of enhanced design requirements varies based on the facility 
requirements and federal, state, or local jurisdiction. It is suggested that these types of facility clusters be 
designed to Category A or B performance.  
12.3. Performance Goals  
The desired and anticipated performance of a building cluster, and its timely recovery of function, need to 
be considered from a community resilience perspective. A summary of the gaps between the desired and 
anticipated performance for building clusters can be summarized using a resilience table. Table 12-3 
shows an example resilience table for building clusters that were evaluated for a specific hazard type 
(e.g., wind, flood, earthquake, etc.) and hazard level (e.g., routine, design, or extreme). The disturbance 
criteria and restoration levels listed at the top of Table 12-3 summarize the anticipated overall impact on 
the community. They are further discussed in Chapter 4 of Volume 1.  
Since communities are constructed for prevailing hazards, the design hazard level provides the foundation 
for resilience planning. Examining the response of buildings and infrastructure systems to multiple levels 
of a hazard (i.e., routine, design, and extreme) can provide insight and understanding regarding system 
performance. For example, a building or infrastructure systems may not perform well at the routine level, 
especially older systems developed with older codes and methods or those that are not well maintained. If 
the building or infrastructure system has an important role in the community, it may trigger cascading 
effects in other buildings or systems. Such performance indicates that mitigation or retrofit options may 
be required to improve community functionality for routine events.  
For buildings, a community should identify clusters for which the same performance goals are desired. 
The example table can be used by any community, whether large, small, urban, or rural, as the assignment 
of buildings to clusters is decided by each community. The building clusters listed in the left column of 
Table 12-3 are grouped as critical facilities, emergency housing, housing/neighborhoods, and community 
recovery. These groups are intended to reflect a typical sequence for recovery of function following a 
hazard event.  
The desired rate of recovery is indicated by percentages, 30 %, 60 %, and 90 %, to indicate how many 
buildings within the cluster are recovered and functioning during the three recovery phases (e.g., short-
term, intermediate, and long-term) across the top row of the table.  
Anticipated performance of the existing construction for each building cluster is estimated (at the 90 % 
level) for the selected hazard event and also recorded in the table. The difference between the desired 90 
% restoration level and the anticipated 90 % performance level indicates the gap that needs to be 
addressed to improve community resilience.  
In Phase I of recovery, building function may initially be restored at a minimum or interim level to 
support essential tasks that start the recovery process. For example, an emergency operations center 
(EOC) in city hall may have enough power provided to support lighting, phones, and computers for the 
EOC, but not the entire building.  
62 
I  
Buildings  
Table 12-3: Example table for building performance goals to be filled out by the community and its 
stakeholders 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Any  30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine, Design, Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized, Community, Regional  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual, Moderate, Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Support 
Building Clusters Days Weeks Months 
Needed4 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Building Performance Category 
A B C D 
Critical Facilities 
Emergency Operation Centers                  
First Responder Facilities                  
Acute Care Hospitals                  
Non-ambulatory Occupants (prisons, nursing 
                 
homes, etc.) 
Emergency Housing 
Temporary Emergency Shelters            
Single and Multi-family Housing (Shelter in 
           
place) 
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Critical Retail                  
Religious and Spiritual Centers                  
Single and Multi-family Housing (Functional)                  
Schools                   
Hotels & Motels                  
Community Recovery 
Businesses - Manufacturing                     
Businesses - Commodity Services                     
Businesses - Service Professions                     
Conference & Event Venues                     
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90 % restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
63 
I  
Buildings  
It is difficult for designers to specify repair 
times for anticipated damage, as there are 
numerous sources of uncertainty. However, 
based on best practices, historical events, 
and expert judgment, designers can estimate 
anticipated levels of damage and based on 
that, assign a likelihood that the buildings 
within a cluster will be functional.  
Existing buildings in suburban and urban 
communities were designed and constructed 
under the building codes in force at that 
time, potentially creating a range of 
performance levels for the same type of 
buildings. Rural towns or unincorporated 
areas may have large stocks of buildings not  
constructed to any code, or at least predating Figure 12-1: Failure of unreinforced masonry wall 
modern building codes. Sometimes, older during an earthquake event 
buildings were designed using provisions 
that were later found to be inadequate, but 
rarely are new provisions retroactively applied. Figure 12-1 shows a partially collapsed unreinforced 
masonry building following a major earthquake. This type of construction performs poorly in 
earthquakes, but many communities have not mandated retrofitting these types of buildings to avoid 
damage or collapse.  
As part of developing desired performance goals for building clusters, the community should identify 
whether any types of buildings pose a significant safety hazard to occupants or the public. Mitigation or 
retrofit programs can be developed to address buildings that pose a significant safety hazard, such as 
unreinforced masonry building retrofit ordinances, requirements for elevated construction in a flood plain, 
or requiring storm shelters in new homes.  
The following paragraphs summarize expected performance for seismic, flood, and wind events for each 
Performance Category. 
Performance Category A buildings should require little repair to return to function. Often recovery of 
function is limited by outside factors such as the availability of power or water. Essential facilities should 
have plans for providing onsite power and water after a hazard event.  
Seismic events: There may be some damage to a Category A building, but the damage can easily be 
addressed (i.e., toppled shelves or cosmetic damage to the structure) as shown in Figure 12-2.  
Flood events: Category A buildings are expected to have damage limited primarily to the exposed 
portions of the building exterior. If buildings are properly elevated, floodwaters may reach subflooring 
and building infrastructure systems but should not overtop the first floor or wet the interior. Figure 12-3 
shows an example of minor flood damage. 
Wind events: Buildings may experience minor damage to roof coverings, openings (e.g., less than 10 % of 
doors and windows broken), and exterior finishes. Figure 12-4 illustrates minor wind damage. 
Performance Category B buildings are expected to sustain damage to building contents, finishes, and 
cladding systems, but the building should be structurally stable. There may be significant nonstructural 
damage, but the building can be used while repairs are made.  
64 
I  
Buildings  
Seismic events: Figure 12-5 shows pictures of significant nonstructural damage inside a building that was 
structurally stable following an earthquake event. It may take up to several weeks to repair minor damage 
to walls or cladding systems and clean up fallen contents .  
  
Figure 12-2: Non-structural damage to Figure 12-3: Floodwaters reached just under the first 
interior finishes following an earthquake event floor on this building. 
  
Figure 12-4: Damage to roof covering, vinyl Figure 12-5: Significant nonstructural damage 
siding and fascia as the result of wind inside structurally stable building after earthquake 
event 
Flood events: Buildings may sustain moderate damage for a limited depth of flooding over the first floor. 
The foundation may have minor undermining or scour. Exterior and interior walls may have water stains 
and possible contamination that requires replacement. Floors and electrical systems may require 
replacement if wetted. While the building may be structurally stable, it may not be safe for use until 
properly dried and cleaned to prevent mold growth, or the drywall is replaced. Figure 12-6 show 
examples of moderate flood damage. 
Wind events: Moderate wind damage may include moderate to major damage to roofing systems and 
exterior finishes. There may be some interior water damage from wind-driven rain. Figure 12-7 shows 
moderate wind damage.  
65 
I  
Buildings  
  
Figure 12-6: As a result of an estimated 0.9-1.2 m (3-4 Figure 12-7: Siding loss and minor envelope 
ft) of flooding, interior walls had to be replaced as well damage on low-rise building from a wind 
as an exterior door and window. [Source: FEMA] event [Source: FEMA] 
Performance Category C buildings are expected to have significant nonstructural and some structural 
damage. The structural damage should not cause structural instability, but may require shoring while 
repairs are conducted. This level of damage may take weeks to months to repair.  
Seismic events: Figure 12-8 shows structural damage, but the structure remains stable. Figure 12-9 shows 
one of ten fractured brace connections in one story of a four story building after a seismic event. Repairs 
took over three months before the building could be reoccupied.  
  
Figure 12-8: Apartment building with damaged Figure 12-9: Fractured brace connection in a 
structural members that is structurally stable building damaged in an earthquake 
Flood events: For flood depths above the first floor or floods with moving water, foundation damage that 
could include settlement and severe scour and undermining may occur. Exterior walls may be severely 
damaged with large missing sections. Interior floor and wall finishes will need replacement. Limited 
deformation of the structural frame may be evident, though the structure remains stable. Proper drying 
66 
I  
Buildings  
and cleaning is necessary prior to prevent mold growth, or the drywall is replaced. Figure 12-10 shows 
severe damage as the result of flooding. 
Wind events: Building damage may include major roof sheathing loss, extensive interior water damage, 
and minor to major cladding damage. Additionally, roof damage may occur where the roof framing is 
uplifted from the walls. Extensive repairs and replacement of interior finishes and cladding systems may 
be required. Figure 12-11 shows severe wind damage.  
  
Figure 12-10: Foundation wall collapse due to Figure 12-11: Wind and wind-borne debris 
hydrostatic pressure from floodwaters [Source: resulted in considerable damage to glazing on this 
FEMA] building. [Source: FEMA] 
Performance Category D buildings cannot be 
used or occupied after a hazard event. Severe 
damage or collapse may occur. This level of 
damage may require removal and new 
construction.  
The example in Figure 12-12 shows structural 
collapse as the result of flood and wind events. 
Such severe damage requires demolition and 
rebuilding, possibly in a new location. 
12.4. Regulatory Environment 
 
Building construction throughout the United 
States is regulated by each community (the local Figure 12-12: Collapse of five-story building due 
jurisdiction) based on the building codes they to undermining (from flooding) of shallow 
adopt. These building codes are based on model foundation [Source: FEMA] 
codes and amended as needed to match the local 
conditions. Amendments to the model code are often governed by state regulations which vary widely. 
Some states do not permit modification by local jurisdictions.  
Typically the local jurisdiction should assure initial construction provides a reasonable degree of safety to 
building users and occupants. After a certificate of occupancy is issued, there are generally no inspection 
or maintenance requirements for residential properties, and generally only annual fire safety inspections 
for commercial buildings. Some building owners voluntarily monitor the condition of their buildings and 
67 
I  
Buildings  
upgrade them as needed. Buildings owned or leased by the federal government are designed and 
constructed to federal government standards.  
Model building codes are developed at the national level for adoption across the country. In the U.S., two 
organizations publish model building codes for adoption by federal agencies or state and local 
governments. One is published by the International Code Council, which formed as a merger of three 
organizations that published regional model building codes. The other code is published by the National 
Fire Protection Association. The ICCs International Building Code is the most widely adopted model 
building codes; and the International Fire Code [ICC 2009] is the most widely adopted model fire code in 
the U.S. Most federal agencies also use these codes, with agency-specific amendments, as the basis for 
their building requirements. These codes contain many reference standards that are typically published by 
non-profit standards development organizations, professional societies, and industry groups. Model 
building codes and the referenced standards may be modified by federal, state, and local agencies for their 
specific purposes.  
While the model building codes specify minimum requirements that are applicable throughout the 
country, states and local municipalities may modify the model building codes to achieve specific goals for 
local or regional hazards. For example, in areas of Florida, building codes were changed to require more 
hurricane-resilient construction following Hurricane Andrew [Tsikoudakis 2012]. Code changes included 
requiring certain types of roofing materials, stronger windows and doors, and greater inspection and 
enforcement.  
Alternatively, some states and local jurisdictions adopt, but amend or remove requirements in model 
building codes, to make them less stringent. Some states have codes that restrict or preclude modifications 
by local jurisdictions. Communities may need to coordinate with state officials to facilitate local adoption 
of code criteria that are more stringent than those of the statewide code. Similarly, jurisdictions may be 
limited from imposing requirements on regulated systems (e.g., energy, communication). Some 
jurisdictions only adopt the model code for government-owned or specific occupancy buildings, but not 
for all buildings in their community. Some communities do not adopt or enforce any building code. 
Enforcing building codes and construction standards is as important as adopting building codes and 
standards. The level of enforcement can significantly impact resilience. Even if the most up-to-date 
building code and standards are in effect, buildings designed and constructed in a substandard manner 
negatively impact community resilience. Therefore, having a properly trained building department to 
review designs for code conformance and inspect construction for conformance with the approved plans, 
is an essential component of community resilience.  
12.5.  Codes and Standards 
The International Building Code [IBC 2015], a commonly adopted model building code, was developed 
to provide design requirements that safeguard public health, safety and general welfare through 
structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy 
conservation, safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the building 
environment, and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency 
operations.  
The International Residential Code [IRC 2015] is widely adopted for residential construction not more 
than three stories in height. The IRC consists of prescriptive code provisions, tables, and figures that can 
be used to construct a dwelling without requiring a registered design professional.  
The International Existing Building Code [IEBC 2015] is used for modifying existing structures, 
including alterations, repairs, additions, relocation, or changes in occupancy. The IEBC provides 
flexibility in the use of alternative approaches to achieve compliance with its requirements. 
68 
I  
Buildings  
The International Code Council Performance Code [ICC 2015] provides a procedure to address design 
and review issues associated with the alternative materials and methods sections of the IBC, IRC, and 
IEBC codes for new and existing buildings.  
The expected performance of each building depends upon the codes and standards enforced at the time of 
construction, as well as the level of enforcement and maintenance. Building codes and standards are 
dynamic and improved on a regular basis. Many changes to codes and standards are due to development 
of new materials and technologies, in response to disasters, or new research on perceived weaknesses. 
The evolving nature of building codes and enforcement, combined with the degradation that occurs over 
time, results in a building stock with variable capacities to resist hazard events. Unless buildings undergo 
major renovation, they generally are not expected to upgrade to current building codes. See Section 12.6.3 
in this chapter. 
Building codes and standards for new construction are based on consensus of best practices and design 
methods at the time they are written. After a significant hazard event, the building code may be modified 
based on observed damage or failures. Some provisions, when changed, become retroactive or are 
enforced during renovations. Examples of these are egress protection, accessibility for differently abled 
persons, and fire suppression system requirements.  
Codes and standards also play an important role when evaluating the performance of a communitys 
existing building stock. The mix of building types, construction, and age can create significant challenges 
when developing plans for a resilient community. Knowledge of past adoption and enforcement of codes 
and standards will improve understanding of anticipated performance of building clusters and the 
associated time to recovery of function.  
12.5.1. New Construction  
Appropriate design criteria for new construction are needed to achieve long-term community resilience 
goals. Revisions to the model codes may be needed to achieve a communitys desired performance . Such 
changes may add incremental costs, but they are minor relative to costs associated with repairs, 
retrofitting existing buildings, or rebuilding.  
Table 12-4 shows hazard levels for buildings and other structures (copied from Chapter 4, Volume I). The 
table is based on ASCE 7-10 [ASCE/SEI 2010]. The hazards are listed in two ways that convey the same 
probability of occurrence: as an average interval of occurrence over time between events with the same 
intensity or magnitude (mean recurrence interval, MRI) or as the probability the event level occurring 
over a 50-year time period. The probability of occurrence description helps convey the relative likelihood 
of hazard event occurrence for the same time period. For each prevailing hazard, communities are 
encouraged to determine three hazard levels for planning: routine, design, and extreme.  
The routine hazard level is below the design level for the built environment and occurs more frequently. 
This event has a high probability of occurring (on the order of 50 % over a 50-year period). At this level, 
resilient buildings and infrastructure systems should remain functional and not experience any significant 
damage that would disrupt social functions in the community. 
The design hazard level is used in codes and standards for buildings, bridges, and similar physical 
infrastructure systems. Design-level events tend to have a probability of occurring on the order of 10 % 
over a 50-year period for ordinary structures, and corresponds with Risk Category II design criteria for 
buildings. The design hazard level for a specific building or infrastructure component may be greater, 
based on its occupancy and risk category classifications. To support community resilience, buildings and 
infrastructure systems should remain sufficiently functional to support the response and recovery of the 
community.  
69 
I  
Buildings  
The extreme hazard level exceeds the design level for the built environment. (Seismic ground motion 
hazards refer to the maximum considered event, which has a probabilistic basis that is supplemented with 
historical data). Extreme events have a small probability of occurrence, on the order of 2 % to 3 % over a 
50-year period. The extreme hazard level should include rare hazards which may plausibly impact a 
community, and may include anticipated long-term changes in hazards due to climate change. Critical 
facilities and infrastructure systems should remain partially functional, with ability to support the 
response and recovery of the community. Other buildings and infrastructure systems should perform at a 
level that protects the occupants, though they may need to be rescued and the buildings may not be safely 
occupied until major repairs are completed  or may need to be demolished and rebuilt.  
Where hazard levels are not defined by code, the community may establish a scenario or hazard level 
based on available guidance or predicted frequency of occurrence. This case is indicated in Table 12-4 by 
locally determined.  
Table 12-4: Hazard levels for buildings and facilities 
Hazard Routine Design Extreme 
50 year MRI or  300 to 500 year MRI1 or  TBD 4 
Ground Snow 
64% in 50 years 15 to 10% in 50 years 
Rain Locally determined 2 Locally determined 2 Locally determined 2 
50 to 100 year MRI or 700 year MRI or 1,700 year MRI 3 or 
Wind  Non-Hurricane 64 to 39% in 50 years 7% in 50 year 3% in 50 years 
50 to 100 year MRI or 700 year MRI or 1,700 year MRI 3 or 
Wind  Hurricane 64 to 39% in 50 years 7% in 50 years 3% in 50 years 
Wind  Tornado Locally determined 3 Locally determined 3 Locally determined 3 
50 year MRI or 500 year MRI or 2,500 year MRI or 
Earthquake4 64% in 50 years 10% in 50 years 2% in 50 years 
Tsunami Locally determined3 Locally determined3 Locally determined3  
Locally determined 100 to 500 year MRI or Locally determined 
Flood 39 to 10% in 50 years 
Fire  Wildfire Locally determined 4 Locally determined 4 Locally determined 4 
Fire Urban/Manmade Locally determined 4 Locally determined 4 Locally determined 4 
Blast / Terrorism Locally determined 5 Locally determined 5 Locally determined 5 
1 For the northeast, 1.6 (the Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) factor on snow load) times the 50-year 
ground snow load is equivalent to the 300 to 500 year snow load.  
2 Rain is designed by rainfall intensity of inches per hour or mm/h, as specified by the local code.  
3 Tornado and tsunami loads are not addressed in ASCE 7-10. Tornadoes are presently classified by the EF scale. 
See FEMA 361 [2015] for tornado EF-scale wind speeds. 
4 Hazards to be determined in conjunction with design professionals based on deterministic scenarios.  
5 Hazards to be determined based on deterministic scenarios.  
70 
I  
Buildings  
Wind hazards. ASCE 7-10 [ASCE/SEI 2010] prescribes design wind speeds for each Risk Category. For 
Risk Category I, the mean return period is 300 years for facilities that have a low risk to human life and 
are typically unoccupied buildings. For Risk Category II facilities, that include typical buildings and other 
structures, the return period is 700 years. For Risk Category III and IV facilities, the return period is 1,700 
years. The wind speeds derived from these return periods are based on extratropical (non-hurricane) 
winds and hurricane winds. Tornado wind loads are not currently required to be considered in building 
design except for the design of tornado shelters. FEMA P-361 [2015a] and ICC-500 [2014] both provide 
tornadic wind loading and design guidance for these shelters.  
The majority of wind design requirements address the structural frame and cladding systems. 
Requirements for functionality are indirectly addressed through design methods and requirements, such as 
attachment strength of nonstructural components (e.g., piping systems or exterior panels). The IBC 
requires consideration of a drift (i.e., lateral displacement) limit between stories under a reduced wind 
load (the factor approximates a 100-year MRI). There are no explicit structural design requirements for 
the building envelope to ensure post-event function, but there are some prescriptive requirements for 
doors and windows.  
Snow hazards. ASCE 7-10 snow design loads are based on a 50-year mean recurrence interval for ground 
snow loads. It is increased with an importance factor for higher Risk Category structures.  
Rain hazards. ASCE 7-10 rain design loads are based on a 100-year rain storm with a time dependent 
(usually 60 minutes) rainfall rate as the design hazard, with loads increased by 60 % to account for 
uncertainty in predicting rainfall in a major event. However, the majority of rain provisions relate to 
providing proper drainage and stiffness to the roof to prevent ponding (i.e., sagging of the roof surface 
that results in a pond of water). There are no code requirements for the building envelope to maintain its 
ability to prevent water infiltration.  
Flood hazards. Flood design provisions for all buildings are typically based on a 100-year MRI for flood 
elevation, though 500-year flood elevations are recommended for design of critical facilities. 
Recommended practice is to locate buildings out of the 100-year flood zone. If they must be within the 
flood zone, floodplain management provisions and building codes require that they be elevated above the 
design flood elevation. Buildings with nonresidential uses may be dry flood-proofed up to the design 
flood elevation if they are not subject to wave forces or high velocity floods. For structures subject to 
flood, the current provisions provide methods to avoid or resist flood forces, but may not be sufficient to 
preserve functionality of the building during a flood event.  
Flood design provisions are neither fully prescriptive or performance based. Instead, they are a mixture of 
the two. Elevation requirements are considered prescriptive because the elevation is mandated by flood 
maps and local codes. Other requirements, such as building designs that resist flotation, collapse, and 
lateral movement, design will be performance based.  
Seismic hazards. It has long been recognized that designing for seismic events requires a different 
approach from other hazards. ASCE 7-10 seismic forces and design requirements allow buildings to be 
damaged, but not collapse. Following the 1971 San Fernando earthquake, hospitals were required to be 
designed to a higher standard, significantly improving their likelihood of remaining functional following 
the design earthquake.  
The emphasis placed on the design requirements for nonstructural systems is an important distinction 
between seismic design provisions and design provisions for other natural hazards [FEMA 2009a, ASCE 
2010]. Many nonstructural systems have bracing requirements. In addition to the bracing requirements, 
nonstructural systems in essential facilities or systems that support life-safety should maintain function or 
immediately return to function following the design seismic hazard.  
Fire hazards. The performance of buildings during fires is addressed through building and fire codes. The 
height, area, design, and construction materials for a building as well as its separation distance from other 
71 
I  
Buildings  
structures are all limited by fire considerations in the building code. Building officials regulate the design 
and construction of new construction, but typically fire officials at the state and local levels enforce the 
fire code. A fire code is primarily intended to advance fire and life safety for the public and first 
responders as well as for property protection. Requirements cover a range of fire and life safety issues 
related to the operation and use of the building after it has been constructed, including the maintenance 
and use of fire protection systems and equipment, occupant safety and hazards management. Fire codes 
also reference many standards that address inspection and maintenance requirements of fire protection 
systems, equipment, flammable and combustible liquids, liquefied petroleum (LP) gas, hazardous 
processes, and other related issues. 
Building codes originated as local regulations to address fire and public health. Passive fire protection 
requirements include limitations on construction materials and interior finishes, and compartmentation, as 
well as providing paths of egress for building occupants. Requirements for active fire protection systems, 
such as automatic fire sprinkler systems in residential, health care, and assembly buildings, are also 
provided. After the WTC disaster, the scope of the building codes was expanded to include protection for 
emergency responders following a major event. 
Fire threats that originate outside the building have traditionally been addressed through provisions for 
exterior fire separation and exterior finish materials. More recently, as the number of structures located in 
the wildland-urban interface (WUI) has increased, the threat of fire spread from wildfires is being 
addressed. Some state and local municipalities have guidelines or code requirements that limit or prohibit 
the use of combustible exterior materials and surrounding vegetation for buildings located in wild fire 
hazard areas. Examples of requirements are prohibition on specific roof and siding materials. Additional 
guidance may be found in the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code [ICC 2011] and the National 
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) FireWise Communities Program [NFPA 2015]. 
Human-caused hazards. Codes and standards do not have explicit structural design requirements for 
human-caused hazards (e.g., arson, explosions or impact events), although some nominal provisions 
attempt to provide robustness to arrest the spread of damage so disproportionate collapse does not occur. 
Many requirements in the IBC require facility layout and hazard mitigation measures to prevent 
explosions of building contents. Guidelines for design of human-caused hazards do exist for specific 
buildings [FEMA 2003, FEMA 2005], federal buildings [DoD 2008] and industrial facilities. Such 
guidelines may have restricted distribution because they contain proprietary or security-sensitive 
information.  
12.5.2. Existing Buildings 
Existing buildings often pose greater challenges than new buildings. For new buildings, codes can be 
amended or re-written. Although construction costs may increase somewhat, new buildings would be 
designed for the state-of-the-practice. Retrofit of existing buildings to the desired level of resilience, in 
contrast, can require significant financial commitment and necessitate major disruption to the buildings 
function, which tends to dissuade building owners from retrofit.  
The cost and disruption associated with retrofit can also make mandating retrofit measures a politically 
unpopular decision. In California, for example, only unreinforced masonry buildings have had widespread 
support as a building type that should be mandated for retrofit since they are most vulnerable to collapse 
during an earthquake.  
For buildings constructed prior to development of flood provisions or a communitys adoption of flood 
provisions, there is a trigger in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requiring retrofit to meet 
current flood provisions. Buildings within designated flood hazard areas (generally the 100-year 
floodplain) that sustain damage of any origin, for which the cost to repair the building to its pre-damage 
72 
I  
Buildings  
conditions equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building, must be brought into 
compliance with current flood provisions.  
The same is true for improvements or rehabilitation of buildings when the cost equals or exceeds this 
threshold. The International Existing Building Code (IEBC) regulates repairs, alterations, additions, and 
change of occupancy dictates various triggers of this type for when retrofit must be done. However, 
enforcement of this requirement can be challenging, particularly in a post-disaster environment when 
communities are anxious to support building owners in reconstruction. 
12.6. Strategies for Implementing Plans for Community Resilience 
12.6.1. Available Guidance 
Current engineering standards provide tools to support assessment of the structural safety of buildings. 
ASCE/SEI 41 [2013], the seismic standard for evaluating and retrofitting existing buildings, provides a 
methodology to assess the performance of buildings for both safety and reoccupation following an 
earthquake. FEMA P-420 Engineering Guidelines for Incremental Strengthening provides information 
related to retrofitting buildings over a period of time. Applied Technology Council (ATC)-45 [2004] 
provides an assessment methodology and re-occupancy guide for damage related to wind and flood 
events. Similar standards do not exist for other hazards.  
Building code provisions can be used to determine whether a building has sufficient fire resistance, 
egress, and other occupant safety-related issues. These methodologies are useful for individual building 
safety, but do not address damage levels and recovery time to function.  
Hazus [FEMA 2015b] provides a tool for communities to assess their vulnerability to earthquakes, 
hurricanes, and other hazards. Hazus is useful for assessing effects of a disaster on a community. 
However, the existing building stock should be adequately reflected in the model, which can require 
significant data gathering.  
Several resources exist for property owners, designers and communities to use to better understand best 
practices for wind and flood resistant design and construction including: 
x FEMA P-55 (Volumes I and II [2011]), Coastal Construction Manual: Principles and Practices of 
Planning, Siting, Designing, Constructing, and Maintaining Residential Buildings in Coastal 
Areas  
x FEMA P-259 [2012a], Engineering Principles and Practices for Retrofitting Floodprone 
Buildings  
x FEMA P-312 [2014], Homeowner's Guide to Retrofitting Six Ways to Protect Home Flooding 
x FEMA P-424 [2010a], Design Guide Improve School Safety EQ, Floods, and High Winds 
x FEMA P-499 [2010b], Home Builders Guide to Coastal Construction: Technical Fact Sheet 
Series  
x FEMA P-550 [2009b], Recommended Residential Construction for Coastal Areas: Building on 
Strong and Safe Foundations  
x FEMA P-804 [2010c], Wind Retrofit Guide for Residential Buildings 
x FEMA P-936 [2013], Floodproofing Non-Residential Buildings 
x ICC 600 [2008], Standard for Residential Construction in High-Wind Regions 
x ATC [2009] Design Guide 2, Basic Wind Engineering for Low-Rise Buildings. 
73 
I  
Buildings  
12.6.2. Solutions for Future Construction 
For future construction, desired performance goals and current adopted building codes should be 
evaluated to determine if additional local requirements are required. Risk categories currently in the 
building codes can support the desired levels of performance and resilience goals. By establishing desired 
building performance for a hazard event in terms of performance and recovery of function, communities 
can add provisions to local building codes and standards that support specific resilience goals. As 
communities rebuild or build new, there is an opportunity to capture the resilience goals of the 
community through building code modifications. 
Some communities may also need to address changing conditions, such as sea level rise, that increase the 
impact of design events, such as coastal floods. For example, some coastal areas are predicted to be below 
sea level by 2100.  
Flood Solutions. For flood-resistant design and construction, best practices exist for communities or 
individuals to implement in addition to code minimum requirements. One basic, but effective, practice is 
locating all new construction outside of flood zones. Additionally, using additional height, or freeboard, 
in building design can also be effective.  
The risk associated with existing flood-prone construction can be addressed primarily through retrofitting: 
x Elevation  Elevation is one of the most common flood retrofitting techniques because it provides 
a high level of protection and does not require the owner to relocate. Elevation involves raising 
the lowest floor or lowest horizontal structural member to be at or above the regulated flood level. 
Common elevation techniques include elevation on piles, piers or columns, and elevation on 
extended foundation walls.  
x Floodproofing  There are two types of floodproofing.  
 Wet floodproofing allows floodwaters to enter the building and quickly reach the same level 
as the floodwaters on the building exterior. Equalizing the water level greatly reduces the 
damaging effects of hydrostatic pressure and buoyancy. Wet floodproofing is generally used 
to limit damage to enclosures below elevated buildings, basements, crawlspaces, or garages. 
Wet floodproofing is not practical for areas used as habitable space.  
 Dry floodproofing involves making a dry floodproofed enclosure substantially impermeable 
to floodwaters, and providing a sump pump to address minimal seepage that can be expected. 
Due to large hydrostatic pressures, dry floodproofing is practical only for buildings with 
reinforced concrete or masonry walls; it is typically not practical for residential buildings or 
for buildings where flood depths exceed 0.6 to 0.9 m (2 to 3 ft). Additional information is 
found in FEMA P-936 [2013].  
Wind Solutions. Stronger design and construction practices for wind resistance are encouraged through a 
variety of existing resources with primary goals of improving continuous load path connections, 
strengthening building envelopes, and protecting openings. 
For buildings subject to a wind hazard, the following solutions are widely accepted as among the most 
effective to address potential damage: 
74 
I  
Buildings  
x Improving roof and wall coverings  Roof and wall coverings are important components of the 
building cladding. If the building cladding is breached during a storm, wind pressures can 
drastically increase internal pressures and cause the failure of the structural system. Wind driven 
rain through breached cladding may cause extensive water damage to interior contents. 
Improving roof coverings may involve reinforcing the roof deck or removing the existing 
covering, securing the roof deck, and installing a new roof covering. Improving wall coverings 
may involve installing moisture barriers and ensuring proper fastener spacing is used or removing 
the existing covering and installing a new wall covering that is rated for high winds.  
x Protecting openings  Openings (e.g., windows, doors, skylights, soffits, and vents) are 
important to the integrity of the building cladding. Glazed openings, such as windows, are often 
vulnerable to debris impact and wind driven rain intrusion. Protecting openings usually involves 
installing an impact-resistant covering (such as a storm shutter) over an unprotected opening or 
installing impact-resistant products (such as a window or door assembly).  
x Continuous load path  The term continuous load path refers to construction that resists all 
loads  such as lateral and uplift wind pressures. A continuous load path starts at the point or 
surface where loads are applied, moves through the framing, continues to the foundation, and 
transfers the loads to the soils that support the building. To be effective, each link in the load path 
 from the roof to the foundation  must transfer loads without failure. Continuous load path 
design typically involves a series of approved connections, such as the roof sheathing to roof 
framing; roof framing to wall; wall to floor; and floor to foundation. 
Rain Solutions. Rain primarily damages buildings through retention on low slope roofs through two 
mechanisms that result in water collection on the roof: inadequate drainage and ponding.  
x Provide proper drainage  Building roof failures due to rain are often the result of blocked or 
undersized drains. Drains should be kept clean. The primary and secondary drain system can be 
evaluated based on current building code requirements to determine if they are sufficient for the 
rain loads.  
x Provide sufficient roof slope or stiffness  Another common manner in which roofs fail from 
rain is due to ponding that occurs when the roof deflects. If there is not sufficient slope or 
stiffness, rainwater can accumulate in ponds created as the roof framing deflects. As the rainwater 
increases, the framing deflects more, allowing for more water to accumulate until the roof 
member is overstressed. The stiffness of roof members against ponding can be assessed. 
Typically it is easier to provide additional slope to mitigate ponding than to stiffen the framing 
members.  
Fire Solutions. Fire is a secondary risk from many other hazards, such as seismic and wind. Retrofit of 
existing structures with automatic sprinkler systems is often an effective way for many communities to 
reduce the immediate threat of fire risk in existing construction. 
For fire hazards, active fire protection through automatic extinguishing systems (AES) to provide 
occupant safety and property protection may not be sufficient during or after some hazard events. Other 
measures may be considered for cases where sprinkler systems fail to extinguish fires. However, fire-
fighting solutions may also be affected by the loss of power, water supply or adequate fire department 
access. 
12.6.3. Solutions for Existing Construction 
Building codes and standards evolve, but little retroactive compliance is required because the cost of 
retrofit can be significant relative to property values. There can be strong resistance to building retrofit 
because it can result in challenges due to cost, inconvenience to building occupants, and disruption of 
75 
I  
Buildings  
operations. However, when retrofit needs are identified as part of community resilience planning, which 
includes long-term goals, the need for such improvements can be supported. For instance, unreinforced 
masonry buildings in high seismic zones can threaten the life safety of occupants. Older buildings may 
also be used for important infrastructure components, such as a base for communication antenna for cell 
phones or to house data centers. 
When deemed necessary, retrofit requirements can be prioritized. The most significant community 
consequences of failure for various types of buildings should be identified for the prevailing hazard. 
Then, the community can make decisions as to whether the best solution is to provide incentives for 
retrofits, establish mandates, criteria to demolish buildings, or other alternatives.  
Given the aforementioned challenges with existing construction, community resilience planning should 
take a long-term view to achieve resilience. For example, the City of Los Angeles instituted an ordinance 
requiring older concrete buildings that present significant collapse hazard in major earthquake be retrofit 
within the next 30 years.  
Flood Solutions. Elevation and floodproofing can also be applied to existing buildings. However, 
relocation may be a more effective option over time. 
x Relocation  Relocation offers the greatest protection from flooding. It involves moving an 
existing building to an area that is less vulnerable to flooding or completely outside the 
floodplain. Relocation includes lifting a building off its foundation, hauling it to a new site, and 
lowering it onto a pre-constructed foundation. Additional information is found in FEMA P-259 
[2012a]. 
Wind Solutions. In some states, existing programs reward wind retrofit measures via homeowners 
insurance discounts. FEMA P-804 [2010c], Wind Retrofit Guide for Residential Buildings, provides 
additional information on specific techniques for wind retrofitting residential buildings. For instance, an 
existing building may be retrofitted if load paths are incomplete or if the load path connections are not 
adequate. Additionally, the Insurance Institute for Business and Home Safety developed a program called 
Fortified that encourages wind retrofits for both new and existing construction [IBHS 2013].  
Snow Solutions. For buildings subjected to snow hazards, the most effective approach is to evaluate and 
strengthen the roof as required. Older building codes did not properly characterize drift effects or rain on 
snow surcharge. This can be accomplished by using the current building code snow load design 
provisions to determine the loads the roof should be able to resist. Also, rooftop equipment added after 
the building was designed can create drifts which add load to the roof. Strengthening the roof or moving 
the equipment can mitigate this issue.  
Seismic Solutions. For buildings subjected to earthquake, many resources are available that describe 
seismic retrofit methods. Typically, retrofit methods rely on augment deficient structural components, 
adding new structural framing systems, or walls to supplement the existing lateral force resisting system.  
x Augment structural interconnection  In older construction, connections between structural 
members and to foundations commonly have deficiencies. In older masonry buildings and 
concrete tilt-up buildings the anchorage of the roof to the wall is a common deficiency. In those 
buildings the walls pull away from the roof in an earthquake, leading to collapse of the wall and 
roof. Mitigation of that is straight forward, by adding supplemental connections between the roof 
and the walls. In older steel-braced frame buildings, brace connections typically do not have the 
strength required due to use of weaker materials and less advanced connection details, which 
results in fracture. In older steel moment frame buildings the beam to column connections have a 
potential to fracture, which occurred during the 1994 Northridge earthquake [FEMA 2000a, 
2000b]. In such cases, mitigation typically involves strengthening the connections or adding new 
structural elements to take load off the frames that have weaker connections [FEMA 2000a, 
2000b].  
76 
I  
Buildings  
x Adding new lateral force elements  Many older buildings do not possess the strength or 
ductility to resist earthquake forces. This is especially common in some older concrete buildings, 
where code minimum reinforcement requirements were found to be inadequate after the 1971 San 
Fernando earthquake. Another example is the unbraced cripple walls under light frame residential 
construction. For these buildings it is advisable to construct new walls or braced frames to stiffen 
the structure to reduce demands on the older members. For light frame construction, plywood can 
be used to provide bracing. 
x Augmenting existing members  In some cases structural members do not possess the required 
strength or ductility to resist earthquake forces. One possible solution may be to augment existing 
elements to provide additional strength, which is less invasive than adding new structural 
elements. Common ways this augmentation occurs is by adding more concrete and reinforcement 
to concrete walls and columns, wrapping concrete elements with fiber reinforced polymer 
elements or steel jackets.  
Example publications that provide direction on how to retrofit building for earthquake resilience are: 
x ASCE 41-13 [ASCE 2013] Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit of Existing Buildings. This is a 
consensus standard that allows users to perform an evaluation and retrofit using performance-
based provisions which match a given earthquake shaking intensity with a specific performance 
level. It is referenced by many building codes and jurisdictions. 
x FEMA 549 [FEMA 2006] Techniques for Seismic Retrofit. This publication provides examples 
of methods to seismically retrofit various types of construction materials and structural 
configurations. It contains example retrofit strategies and details to address identified 
deficiencies. 
x FEMA P-807 [FEMA 2012b] Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit of Multi-Unit Wood-Frame 
Buildings with Weak First Stories, Federal Emergency Management Agency 
12.6.4. Strategy Prioritization 
Gaps in desired performance should be prioritized based on either the most significant gaps, the beneficial 
gaps to mitigate, or impact to the community. Even small improvements in buildings performance may 
have major positive impacts on community resilience.  
Making a community more resilient is a long-term proposition. Communities can develop short, medium 
and long-term goals for addressing resilience. Typically the shorter term goals relate to creating a 
resilience plan and changes to new building codes and standards. This can have the positive affect of not 
adding any more non-resilient buildings to a cluster. Medium and long-term goals typically relate to 
incentivized or mandated retrofit of specific building clusters. Often the differentiator between medium 
and long-term retrofit or replacement goals is based on the amount of cost associated with the retrofit or 
replacement.  
As an example, the city of San Francisco created a comprehensive Earthquake Safety Implementation 
Plan [The City and County of San Francisco 2011]. The plan sets forth a variety of goals to improve the 
citys resilience to a major earthquake. Retrofit of large wood framed multi-family buildings was deemed 
important enough and had somewhat lower costs associated with it (when compared to retrofit of other 
buildings), so it was deemed a medium term goal. Retrofit of large, older concrete buildings, while still a 
significant hazard was identified as a long term goal in part because the cost and disruption of retrofit to 
those buildings was significantly greater. Also, mandating retrofit of the large concrete buildings would 
not have protected as many residents as mandating retrofit of wood frame residential apartment buildings. 
77 
I  
Buildings  
12.7. References 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2010) ASCE 7-10: Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
and Other Structures, Second Edition, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural 
Engineering Institute (SEI), Reston, VA. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2013) ASCE 41-13: Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit of 
Existing Buildings, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural Engineering Institute (SEI), 
Reston, VA. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2013) ASCE 41-13: Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit of 
Existing Buildings, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural Engineering Institute (SEI), 
Reston, VA. 
Applied Technology Council (ATC 2003) ATC-58-2: Preliminary evaluation of methods for defining 
performance, Applied Technology Council (ATC), Redwood City, California. 
Applied Technology Council (ATC 2004) ATC-45: Field Manual: Safety Evaluation of Buildings after 
Windstorms and Floods, Applied Technology Council (ATC), Redwood City, California. 
Applied Technology Council (ATC 2009) ATC Design Guide 2: Basic Wind Engineering for Low-Rise 
Buildings, Applied Technology Council (ATC), Redwood City, CA.  
Department of Defense (DoD 2008) Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC): DoD Security Engineering 
Facilities Planning Manual, UFC 4-020-01. DoD, Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2000a) FEMA-351: Recommended Seismic Evaluation 
and Upgrade Criteria for Existing Welded Steel Moment-Frame Buildings, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC.  
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2000b) FEMA-355F: State of the Art Report on 
Performance Prediction and Evaluation of Steel Moment-Frame Buildings, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2003) FEMA-426: Reference Manual to Mitigate 
Potential Terrorist Attacks Against Buildings. Risk Management Series, December, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC.  
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2005) FEMA-452: Risk Assessment A How-To Guide to 
Mitigate Potential Terrorist Attacks Against Buildings, Risk Management Series, January, Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC.  
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2006) FEMA 549, Hurricane Katrina in the Gulf 
Coast: Mitigation Assessment Team Report, Building Performance Observations, Recommendations, and 
Technical Guidance, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2009a) FEMA P-750: NEHRP Recommended Seismic 
Provisions for New Buildings and Other Structures, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), 
Washington, DC 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2009b) FEMA P-550: Recommended Residential 
Construction for Coastal Areas: Building on Strong and Safe Foundations, Second Edition, Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2010a) FEMA P-424: Design Guide for Improving 
School Safety in Earthquake, Floods, and High Winds, Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA), Washington, DC. 
78 
I  
Buildings  
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2010b) FEMA P-499: Home Builders Guide to 
Coastal Construction: Technical Fact Sheet Series, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), 
Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2010c) FEMA P-804: Wind Retrofit Guide for 
Residential Buildings, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2011) FEMA P-55 (Volume I and II): Coastal 
Construction Manual: Principles and Practices of Planning, Siting, Designing, Constructing, and 
Maintaining Residential Buildings in Coastal Areas, Fourth Edition. Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA), Washington DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2012a) FEMA P-259: Engineering Principles and 
Practices for Retrofitting Flood-Prone Residential Structures, Third Edition, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2012b) FEMA P-807: Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit 
of Multi-Unit Wood-Frame Buildings with Weak First Stories, Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA), Washington DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2013) FEMA P-936: Floodproofing Non-Residential 
Buildings, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washingron, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2014) FEMA P-312: Homeowners Guide to 
Retrofitting: Six Ways to Protect your Home from Flooding, Third Edition, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC.  
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2015a) FEMA P-361: Safe Rooms for Tornadoes and 
Hurricanes, Third Edition, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2015b) Hazus Multi-Hazard Program. Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC, https://www.fema.gov/hazus. 
IBC (2015) International Building Code, International Code Council, http://shop.iccsafe.org/codes/2015-
international-codes-and-references/2015-international-building-code-and-references.html. 
Insurance Institute of Business & Home Safety (IBHS 2013) FORTIFIED Overview, Tampa, FL, 
https://disastersafety.org/fortified/fortified-home/. Last viewed April 18, 2015. 
International Code Council (ICC 2009) International Fire Code, Country Club Hills, IL. 
International Code Council (ICC 2011) International Wildland-Urban Interface Code, Country Club 
Hills, IL.  
International Code Council (ICC 2014) ICC 500-2014: ICC/NSSA Standard for the Design and 
Construction of Storm Shelters, Country Club Hills, IL.  
International Code Council (ICC 2015) ICCPC: 2015 International Code Council Performance Code for 
Buildings and Facilities, International Code Council, Country Club Hills, IL. 
International Code Council, Inc. (ICC 2008) Standard for Residential Construction in High-Wind 
Regions, Country Club Hills, IL. 
IRC (2015) International Residential Code, International Code Council, 
http://shop.iccsafe.org/codes/2015-international-codes-and-references/2015-international-residential-
code-and-references.html. 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 2015) FireWise Communities, National Fire Protection 
Association, Battery Park, MA. http://www.firewise.org/?sso=0. 
79 
I  
Buildings  
Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission (OSSPAC 2013) The Oregon Resilience Plan: 
Reducing Risk and Improving Recovery for the Next Cascadia Earthquake and Tsunami, Report to the 
77th Legislative Assembly from the Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission, Salem, OR. 
Plyer, A. (2015) Facts for Features: Katrina Impact, The Data Center, Nonprofit Knowledge Works, 
August 28, http://www.datacenterresearch.org/data-resources/katrina/facts-for-impact/. 
San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association (SPUR 2009) The Resilient City: What San 
Francisco Needs from its Seismic Mitigation Policies, San Francisco Planning and Urban Research 
Association (SPUR), San Francisco, CA. 
The City and County of San Francisco (CAPSS 2011) Earthquake Safety Implementation Program, San 
Francisco, CA. 
Tsikoudakis, M. (2012) Hurricane Andrew prompted better building code requirements: Some regions 
seeing new building codes, Business Insurance, Crain Communications, August 19, 
http://www.businessinsurance.com/article/20120819/NEWS06/308199985. 
80 
I  
Transportation Systems  
13. Transportation Systems 
Transportation Systems Executive Summary 
Community Dependence. Transportation systems are critical to communities. People use various 
transportation systems daily to travel to and from work and school, visit family and friends, attend 
business meetings, and reach medical facilities during emergencies. Businesses use trucks, ships, trains, 
and airplanes to transport goods from their point of production to their point of use or consumption. 
While roads and bridges are a critical part of the transportation network, communities also rely upon other 
systems of transportation, including: 
x Airports to transport people and goods long distances in a short period of time 
x Passenger and freight rail lines to transport people and goods regionally/nationally 
x Subway lines or light rail corridors in large urban centers to transport people to/from work and 
entertainment/leisure activities 
x Harbors and ports to import/export goods globally and distribute them on inland waterways 
x Inland waterways, such as the Mississippi River, to transport people and goods 
x Ferry terminals/waterways to transport the workforce to/from work (e.g., New York , San 
Francisco, Seattle) 
x Pipelines to transport natural gas and petroleum nationally and regionally to utilities and 
refineries 
Complexities. The transportation system as a whole is complex because people and businesses often rely 
on multiple transportation modes. When one connection point between modes is negatively affected, it 
can result in trip delays or delivery interruptions. Multi-modal systems and connection points add to the 
challenge of coordinating activities to build resilience of the transportation system and the communities it 
supports. 
Transportation infrastructure can play an important role when preparing for natural hazard events for 
which there is advanced warning and supporting recovery after an event. Prior to an event, families may 
need to travel home and then follow evacuation routes to safe shelters. After an event, transportation 
infrastructure is critical for first responders to reach those in need, for electric power and communication 
crews to restore utility lines, and for ingress of critical supplies needed by community members. 
Vulnerabilities. When planning for a hazard event and beginning the recovery process after an event 
occurs, communities should consider any vulnerability in the transportation network that may seriously 
affect the ability of the community to achieve full recovery in the intermediate and long terms. 
Communities should also consider improving the level of transportation network performance in future 
hazard events. Intermediate community transportation needs may include: the ability of public sector 
employees to get to their posts; the ability of community members to get to work, school, retail stores, 
and hospitals; and the ability to access airports, ports and harbors, and railway stations for travel and 
commerce. In the long term, communities should strive to go beyond simply recovering by prioritizing 
improvements to the transportation network, particularly parts that failed or were the source of stress on 
the network.  
Dependencies. Infrastructure systems critical to community recovery and restoration, both pre- and post-
event, have significant dependencies on transportation systems. These critical infrastructure systems 
include energy systems, communications systems, buildings, and water/wastewater systems. For example, 
electric power plants rely on bulk shipments of coal or fuel by barge and freight rail and gas-fired plants 
81 
I  
Transportation Systems  
rely on natural gas pipelines. The energy system also relies on transportation systems so repair crews can 
reach areas where power failures have occurred and bring services online quickly.  
Community Resilience. Infrastructure for roads and highways, rail, air travel, ports, harbors, waterways 
and pipelines all have known vulnerabilities to hazard events. Community resilience performance goals 
for the transportation system in this Guide are defined by how quickly the functionality of infrastructure 
systems recover after a hazard event. Minimizing downtime can be achieved during design or by 
developing and implementing well-prepared recovery plans (ideally both). Performance goals for the 
transportation system should be established by a panel of key stakeholders from within the community 
system owners and operators, engineers, planners, regulators, codes and standards representatives, and 
representatives of other infrastructure systems. 
Performance Goals. Performance goals for transportation systems are necessary to support prioritization 
of system components that are most critical to community response and recovery. Prioritization relative to 
performance goals ensures that efforts to improve resilience focus on actions that will bring the most 
benefit to the community. Priorities for each system that supports ingress, egress, and community 
transportation functions depend on the systems role in the community. The ability of each system to 
effectively serve these functions is a balance of the volume of people or goods that the system has the 
capacity to move and its ability to interface with both the local community and surrounding region. 
Codes and Standards. The transportation industry uses standards to establish the minimum acceptable 
criteria for design and construction. Transportation codes and standards are typically adopted and 
enforced by each states Department of Transportation, though many local jurisdictions may also impose 
additional local requirements. While practice varies somewhat, for the most part state DOT design 
manuals and practices closely follow the guidance in the AASHTO Policy. The FHWA is responsible for 
approving the design of highways on the National Highway System. FHWA has adopted the AASHTO 
Policy as the applicable set of design values and criteria that apply to such facilities. Although adoption of 
standards is important, enforcement is key to ensure compliance of the built environment with these 
standards. 
For new transportation construction, current federal and state project development guidelines require an 
environmental study at the early stages of projects to identify potential environmental impacts and 
state/federal permitting requirements. An Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), Environment 
Assessment (EA), and other similar processes require local community input. Such processes can be an 
important opportunity for the community to discuss the resiliency performance criteria and goals for the 
project, regardless of whether or not they are covered by the codes. For example, a community could 
request that the performance goal exceed the 500-year flood criteria for an interstate highway project to 
assure continued operation in an extreme flood event. 
The design of transportation systems has been refined over time; however, existing transportation systems 
are usually bound by the codes and standards for which they were initially designed. Typically, there is no 
requirement that transportation infrastructure be upgraded to meet the new standards as they develop, 
with the exception of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) guidelines for seismic retrofit of 
bridges promulgated in the 1980s. However, it is possible to make improvements to meet the criteria of 
current standards during retrofits. For example, when planning rehabilitation of a highway bridge or 
tunnel, the community should consider upgrading other system features to meet the current performance 
goals and to protect the investment being made. 
Resilience Solutions. Resilience solutions for new and future construction should start in the project 
planning phase. Selection of site location, alignment, and grade level can increase resilience with the 
lowest cost and schedule impacts. For new surface transportation projects, placing roadways, tracks and 
tunnel portals at a naturally high grade, locating bridge foundations outside of a waterway when feasible, 
and avoiding roadways cut into unstable side slopes are options that should be taken advantage of when 
82 
I  
Transportation Systems  
they are available. Likewise for airports near bodies of water and seaports, elevating critical infrastructure 
components and avoiding soils that are unstable during earthquakes will improve system performance. 
To increase the resiliency of existing transportation infrastructure, a good strategy is to first prioritize the 
transportation assets by their degree of criticality for supporting community resilience and their 
vulnerability to damage or loss from a hazard. After prioritizing assets, a plan to improve resilience can 
be developed to meet both short-term and long-term needs. 
13.1. Introduction 
Transportation systems are critical to our daily lives. People use transportation systems to travel to and 
from work, school, visits to family and friends, attend business meetings, and manage their health. 
However, the transportation network meets many needs beyond those of individuals. Businesses use 
trucks, ships, trains, and airplanes to transport goods from the point of production to the point of use or 
consumption. For example, food is often transported from the producer (e.g., a farm) to a processing and 
packing plant, then to a regional or national distribution center, and finally to the local stores where it can 
be purchased by consumers. All steps in this product distribution example rely heavily on transportation 
systems.  
Traditionally, people think of transportation systems as roads and bridges for moving both goods and 
people. Although roads and bridges are a critical part of the transportation network, communities also rely 
upon other transportation systems, including: 
x Airports to transport people and goods long distances in a short period of time 
x Passenger and freight rail lines to transport people and goods regionally/nationally 
x Subway lines or light rail corridors in large urban centers (e.g., New York, D.C., Chicago, Los 
Angeles) to transport people to and from work, entertainment, and leisure activities 
x Harbors and ports to import/export goods globally and distribute them on inland waterways 
x Inland waterways, such as the Mississippi River, to transport people and goods 
x Ferry terminals and waterways to transport the workforce to and from work (e.g., San Francisco, 
New York, Seattle) 
x Pipelines2 to transport natural gas and petroleum nationally and regionally to utilities and 
refineries  
The transportation system is complex, with multiple modes, each having its own complexities. These 
complexities can make coordinating activities between systems for community resilience challenging. 
Examples of complexity include: 
x Within a small geographical area (i.e., a community) many stakeholders may be responsible for 
design, operation, maintenance and funding of the road network, including federal, state, and 
local public agencies, as well as private operators of toll ways.  
x The rail system includes both freight networks, which are key to support economic activity, and 
passenger rail services within cities and across states, which may have multiple private and public 
stakeholders. 
                                                      
2 Pipelines are included in the transportation chapter because they are regulated by the Department of Transportation. Water 
pipelines are discussed in Chapter 15. 
83 
I  
Transportation Systems  
x Marine transportation includes domestic and international movement of passengers and goods 
across regions. The various regions may have their own standards and guidelines for design, 
operation and maintenance for marine transportation systems. In the case of passenger ferries, a 
lack of docking requirement standardization limits the transferability of vessels to support 
recovery from hazard events.  
x The aviation system includes public and private airports of varying sizes, with public and private 
stakeholders, that support air freight and commercial air passenger services. Air fields are sized to 
accommodate aircraft landing needs, and larger aircraft may not be able to land at smaller 
airports. 
Many people rely on multiple modes of transportation (i.e., intermodal transportation) every day. 
Businesses use multiple systems of transportation to move goods efficiently and cost effectively. 
Similarly, goods may be imported using ships; however, to get the goods from the ship to the next step in 
the supply chain trucks or rail are requires. Section 13.1.2 contains more discussion on intermodal 
transportation. 
This chapter addresses the role of the transportation system in community resilience. To address 
resilience of their infrastructure, communities need to first understand how the transportation system 
supports the community and characterize the existing transportation systems. This step includes 
identifying the parties responsible for the condition and maintenance of the infrastructure, regulatory 
bodies, and other key stakeholders. Communities should work with stakeholders to determine desired 
performance goals for the transportation infrastructure and evaluate the anticipated performance of the 
existing infrastructure for prevailing hazards. Determining differences between the desired and 
anticipated system performance will identify weak nodes and links in the network, and aid communities 
to prioritize proposed upgrades to improve resilience of individual network components and, 
consequently, the transportation network as a whole. Section 13.3 provides a performance goal table that 
communities can use to identify the desired and anticipated performance of transportation systems, and 
the gaps in performance.  
13.1.1. Social Needs and System Performance Goals 
The social needs of the community drive the performance goals to be defined by each community, its 
infrastructure owner, and stakeholders, as discussed in Chapter 10. The social needs of the community 
include those of community members, local businesses, supply chains of large national and multi-national 
businesses, industry, and government. Each community should define its own performance goals based 
on the time needed for its infrastructure to be restored following a hazard event for three levels of hazard: 
routine, expected, and extreme, as defined in Chapter 4 (Volume I). 
While not all natural hazard events can be forecast, the transportation system may play an important role 
prior to a natural hazard event with advanced warning (e.g., hurricane), and after a hazard event. Prior to 
an event, transportation systems enable: 
x Transport of residents to their homes from work, school or daycare  
x Ability to evacuate to shelters or distant safe communities 
Following a hazard event, the community may have short-term (0-3 days), intermediate (1-12 weeks), or 
long term (4-36+ months) recovery needs. For transportation, short-term needs may include: 
x Access for emergency responders (firefighters, paramedics, police) to reach people in need 
x Access for workers to restore critical facilities and supporting infrastructure (energy, 
communications, water, wastewater) 
84 
I  
Transportation Systems  
x Access to facilities for shelter, medical care, banks, commerce, and food 
x Egress or evacuation from a community immediately after a hazard event, if needed 
x Ingress of goods and supplies immediately after event to provide aid 
Communities need to also consider vulnerabilities in the transportation network that may seriously affect 
full recovery. Resilience plans should consider ways to improve the level of transportation network 
performance for the next hazard event. Intermediate and long-term transportation needs may include: 
x Ability of public sector employees (who run government, direct traffic, respond to emergencies, 
run transit systems, and teach or work in schools) to reach their posts  
x Ability for community members to get to work, school, medical facilities, sports and 
entertainment venues, and places to gather for religious or cultural events. 
x Access to businesses (both small and large), banks, retail, manufacturing, and similar facilities so 
they can receive supplies and serve their customers 
x Access to key transportation facilities (airports, ports/harbors, railway stations) so goods can be 
transported and the supply chain restored 
Communities should strive to go beyond simply recovering by prioritizing and planning for 
improvements to the sections of the transportation network that address their current and project social 
needs. 
13.1.2. Dependencies 
Chapter 11 details the dependencies of all critical infrastructure systems in a community. As the built 
environment within communities grows more complex and different systems grow more dependent on 
one another to provide services, addressing the issue of dependencies becomes an increasingly critical 
aspect of resilience.  
Transportation systems play a critical role in supporting each other, as well as critical services and other 
infrastructure systems. Hospitals, fire stations, police, and other emergency response systems depend on 
transportation before, during, and after a hazard event. Evacuation depends on the capacity of roads, 
waterways, airports, and rail, as well as the governments ability to manage them. Relief efforts are 
hindered until damage to transportation systems is repaired.  
Specific dependencies on the transportation system include: 
x Energy  Many power plants rely on bulk shipments of coal or fuel via barge and freight rail for 
their operation. Gas fired plants rely on natural gas pipelines. Resource recovery plants rely on 
bulk shipments of refuse via truck. Interruption to barge, freight rail, and truck routes from a 
hazard event can affect power generation if fuel at these power plants is not stockpiled in 
advance.  
x Communication and Information  As fiber networks are expanded, many are routed through 
leased conduits over bridges and through tunnels to cross waterways or other geographic features. 
This makes them vulnerable if those transportation assets are damaged from flooding, 
earthquakes, or storm surge, which can knock out portions of the fiber communications network. 
Postal services delivering letters, documents, and packages also rely entirely on the transportation 
network. 
85 
I  
Transportation Systems  
x Buildings/Facilities  Large transportation terminals or stations, airline terminals, and port cargo 
facilities cease to function when transportation systems are shut down by a hazard event. Mixed 
use transportation facilities that are integrated with retail, businesses, and hotels are also impacted 
when transportation stops. 
x Water/Wastewater  The pipelines used by water and wastewater systems are often located 
within the right-of-way of roads and bridges, and are considered part of the transportation system. 
Water and wastewater treatment plants also rely on transportation to deliver chemicals used for 
treatment. 
Specific interdependencies of transportations systems with the other infrastructure systems addressed in 
this Guide include:  
x Energy  The transportation system depends on the power and energy grid. Gas stations need 
electricity for vehicle owners to access fuel. Following Hurricane Sandy, gas stations, utilities, 
and other entities that fuel transportation vehicles could not operate without power, which 
hindered both evacuation and recovery. Electric power is also necessary for traffic signals to 
function. During the northeast blackout of 2003, New York Citys 11,600 traffic signals were 
inoperable due to the loss of power, resulting in mass gridlock [DeBlasio et al. 2004]. Airports, 
rail stations, moveable bridges, vehicular tunnels and ports rely on electric energy for lighting, 
functionality of mechanical components, fire and life safety, and for functionality of the buildings 
themselves (see Chapter 12). Regional passenger rail, subways, and light rail rely on electric 
energy to function as well as for fire/life safety inside the tunnels. However, the energy industry 
also relies on transportation systems to allow repair crews to reach areas where failures have 
occurred and bring services online quickly. The logistics of deploying repair crews often starts 
with clearing roads to provide access to utility repair crews. 
Transportation systems also include natural gas and petroleum pipelines that supply fuel storage, 
generation, and distribution systems. Pipelines also transport jet fuel to major airports. Most 
pipelines in the continental  are buried beneath the ground and can rupture from 
earthquakes or wash out due to flooding.  
x Communication  The communications system relies on roads and bridges so repair crews can 
get into areas where restoration is needed for telephone and cable lines, cell towers, and fiber 
optic networks. Conversely, transportation systems depend on communications to relay 
information. Airports use communications for instrument-controlled aircraft operations to relay 
logistical and scheduling information to passengers and to communicate with other air traffic via 
air traffic control. Light rail, train, and bus stations rely on communication systems to coordinate 
and schedule inbound/outbound times for users. Highways depend on Intelligent Transportation 
Systems (ITS) to monitor traffic levels, direct traffic around areas of congestion, and respond to 
accidents and emergencies. ITS cameras, sensors, and variable message signs are supported on 
fiber networks, some owned and some leased by Departments of Transportation (DOTs). Tolled 
highways and bridges rely on communication systems for electronic toll collection. 
x Building/Facilities  Buildings are rendered useless if people cannot reach them. Transportation 
systems allow people to travel to critical facilities, businesses, and to other homes and facilities to 
check on the safety of friends, family and vulnerable populations. When transportation systems 
are not available to get community members to buildings and facilities, such structures also 
cannot contribute to the recovery.  
86 
I  
Transportation Systems  
x Water and Wastewater  Water and wastewater lines are often buried beneath roads (i.e., below 
grade). Moreover, leaks and failure of waterlines under roads can damage road foundations and 
sinkholes may form. Consequently, access to roads is needed to reach points of failure. 
Conversely, critical facilities in the transportation system require water and wastewater for 
maintenance, sanitation, disposal, and emergency services (e.g., firefighting).  
x Intermodal Transportation. Due to the nature of our large, diverse transportation network and 
how it is used today, intermodal transportation is a key consideration for communities. 
Intermodal transportation varies by community, depending on the communitys size, needs, 
structure, and complexity. Individuals in some communities may function well using only the 
road network. However, the community needs access to the larger transportation network. Hence, 
other methods of transportation are needed to get food and supplies to local retailers in these 
communities.  
In todays global environment, goods are imported via airplane, ship, truck, or train. Goods imported by 
airplane or ship, are then loaded onto either trains or trucks. Depending on the goods being transported, 
the next stop in the supply chain may be a manufacturing or processing plant, national or regional 
distribution center, or a warehouse. Retailers often use warehouses or regional distribution centers to 
manage products and provide goods to local stores via truck in a short time period. Therefore, 
coordination is needed between the different methods of transportation used by businesses to ensure their 
products can be delivered to the customer.  
People also use multiple methods of transportation, particularly in large urban centers, to get to and from 
work, school, entertainment facilities, homes, banks, etc. People who work in large cities often rely on 
mass transit, such as bus transit for most of their commutes. However, to get to their bus stop, rail station, 
or final destination, individuals may rely on the roadway system, including buses, taxis, bicycles, or 
walking.  
Although several methods of transportation are available to individuals and businesses, providing 
redundancy to the overall network, failures in one system can put significant stress on other transportation 
systems. For example, even partial loss of use of the subway system in Chicago, New York, or 
Washington DC would cause significant congestion and gridlock in the roadway network. 
Freight transportation systems in the U.S. have less redundancy than systems that transport people. The 
freight rail lines currently have detours of hundreds of miles around certain critical routes that follow river 
beds and cross large rivers. With the reduced number of freight trains and the high costs for maintaining 
the right of way of freight tracks, railroads have reduced the number of redundant lines. Many of the 
abandoned rail lines have been converted to recreational paths for pedestrians and cyclists. However, 
there is redundancy in the freight system due to the ability to choose between barges, rail, and trucks. 
Freight transportation by barge moves very large volumes at relatively low energy costs, but has very 
limited system redundancy since it depends on navigable waterways. River flooding or a damaged or 
collapsed river crossing can lead to major delays of large volumes of freight. 
In general, freight transported by truck has more redundancy than rail or barge freight; however, the 
national highway system has certain critical river crossings that, if damaged in a hazard event, can lead to 
long detours and heavily congested highway bottlenecks.  
87 
I  
Transportation Systems  
13.2. Transportation Infrastructure 
Transportation systems in the  are large and complex. This section is divided into five main 
categories:  
x Section 13.2.1  Roads, Bridges, Highways, and Road Tunnels 
x Section 13.2.2  Rail 
x Section 13.2.3  Air  
x Section 13.2.4  Ports, Harbors, and Waterways 
x Section 13.2.5  Pipelines 
These sections discuss the components of their network, potential vulnerabilities, and solutions used in 
the past to successfully mitigate failures. The first four sections deal with systems of the larger 
transportation network used to move both people and goods. The fifth section, Pipelines, discusses a 
system used to move resources alone (e.g., natural gas).  
13.2.1. Roads, Bridges, Highways, and Road Tunnels 
Roads and Highways. Roads and highways are vital to the nations transportation infrastructure. The 
nations 6.5 million km (4 million miles) of public roadways supported 4.8 trillion km (3 trillion miles) of 
vehicle travel in 2011 [ASCE 2013]. The large network of roads and highways serves as the primary 
transportation infrastructure used by most people and businesses. Although other methods of 
transportation, such as subways and airplanes, move a mass amount of people and goods to specific hubs 
or nodes of the transportation network, roads and highways are most frequently used to get people and 
goods to their final destinations. Loss of a road, bridge, or tunnel can dramatically increase the time 
required for emergency responders to reach an area or reduce the ability for individuals to evacuate after 
the event. 
When considering the road network, communities need to think about not only cars and trucks, but other 
methods of transportation, including buses, bicycles, and pedestrians. Locally, communities (particularly 
large communities with a stressed road system) should consider developing a long-term transportation 
plan that encourages people to use other methods of transportation (e.g., bicycles and buses) in addition to 
personal vehicles. Bicycle lanes, for example, can be added by widening the road by approximately 1.2 m 
(4 ft) in a planned construction project. Note, however, that the usefulness of making such changes will 
vary by community based on average commute time and accessibility to alternative methods of 
transportation. Regardless, a goal of the road system for a community may be to encourage and support as 
many methods of transportation as possible to make it more efficient, rather than relying on just cars and 
trucks. Increasing the transportation efficiency of a community in a resilient manner may be an alternative 
to just focusing on one mode of travel [Cities21 2015, Sustainable Cities 2010]. 
88 
I  
Transportation Systems  
In addition to moving people and goods on roads 
and highways, essential utilities distribute services 
either along-side, above, or below the grade of 
roads. Therefore, the failure of roads and 
highways not only disrupts the ability to move 
people and goods, it can leave the necessary utility 
services vulnerable to both initial and secondary 
hazards (e.g., uprooting of a tree or other debris 
falling on a power or communication line). For 
example, flooding can undercut road beds. Figure 
13-1 provides an example of interdependency. In 
the figure, a pipe that lay directly underneath the 
road shoulder was vulnerable to damage as a  
result of road failure.  Figure 13-1: Road undercutting in the aftermath 
Roads are also susceptible to damage from of Hurricane Irene (Source: Photo by Elissa Jun 
earthquakes. The force of earthquakes can cause [FEMA 2014a]) 
roads to split, as seen after the Loma Prieta 
earthquake [Duwadi 2010]. Moreover, secondary 
effects of earthquakes, such as landslides and fires can also damage roadways or other transportation 
infrastructure. 
Failure or loss of service of individual roads does 
not typically cause a major disruption for a 
community, because redundancy is often built into 
the road network. Major disruptions occur when a 
significant portion or critical component of the 
road/highway network fails, such that people and 
goods cannot get to their destinations. Flash 
flooding in mountain communities, where roads 
typically follow river beds with multiple bridge 
crossings, has left entire communities cut off 
when roads and bridges collapsed from scour (i.e.,  
erosion of bank material around foundations, Figure 13-2: Local road blocked by fallen trees 
particularly for bridges). For example, a dozen after remnants of extra-tropical storm struck 
towns in Vermont were completely cut off from Kentucky [Source: Kentucky Public Service 
emergency aid in 2011 when Hurricane Irene Commission 2009]  
dumped 280 mm (11 inches) of rain over a 
weekend, washing out roads and bridges [Dolak 
2011]. Similarly, in Boulder, Colorado, search and rescue teams could not reach stranded communities 
after 150 mm (6 inches) of rain fell over 12 hours in September 2013, cutting off mountain towns after 
recent wildfires depleted the terrain of vegetation [Frosch and Williams 2013]. Large areas of the road 
and highway system can be impacted by debris from high wind events (e.g., hurricanes, extra-tropical 
storms, tornadoes), flooding (as seen in Hurricane Sandy), earthquakes, and ice storms. In the short term, 
tree fall (see Figure 13-2) on roads slows-down emergency response and repair crews from getting to 
locations where their assistance is needed, and may also damage electric power and communication 
systems.  
Ice storms, as previously discussed, can also cause road blockages by tree fall, as seen after the January 
2009 ice storm in Kentucky [Kentucky Public Service Commission 2009]. However, ice itself can also 
shut down the road network because even relatively small amounts of ice make driving conditions 
dangerous, particularly in those areas where communities are not well prepared for snow and ice storms 
89 
I  
Transportation Systems  
due to their infrequent occurrence. In states that are well prepared for these events and experience them 
regularly, ice storms or large snowfall events do not typically cause significant disruptions to 
transportation.  
Bridges. Bridges are important components of the road and railway networks, because they traverse 
significant geological features such as canyons, rivers, and bodies of water. Bridges are the most costly 
part of a roadway or railway system to build and maintain. Temporary closure of a bridge may lead to 
significant detour travel distances.  
Bridges, like roads, are impacted by the harshness of their respective environmental conditions (e.g., 
freeze-thaw cycles). Many bridges include expansion joints that may allow water and other debris to 
infiltrate the road surface, leading to corrosion and deterioration of both the superstructure (i.e., beams 
and deck) and substructure (e.g., piers, bearings, and abutments), and degradation of bridge performance. 
However, some short bridges (i.e., less than 90 m [300 ft]) are designed using integral abutments to 
eliminate expansion joints and reduce this source of degradation [Johnson 2012]. 
Scour is a leading cause of bridge failures [FHWA 
2011]. Scour occurs when a combination of water 
velocity and soil characteristics leads to erosion of 
the stream bed around a foundation. Scour can be 
resisted through proper design and construction.  
Flooding and wave action from hurricane storm 
surge (or tsunamis) can damage bridges in other 
ways. During Hurricane Katrina, wave-induced 
forces lifted and displaced multiple spans of the I-
10 twin bridges over Lake Pontchartrain off their 
bearings (Figure 13-3) [Duwadi 2010]. 
Earthquakes in San Fernando Valley, Loma Prieta,  
and Northridge, CA resulted in bridge collapses Figure 13-3: Bridge sections knocked off their 
through failure of piers and decks [Duwadi 2010].  supports during Hurricane Katrina due to wave 
Longer bridges tend to have relatively lightweight action. (Source: Photo by Win Henderson [FEMA 
superstructures (decks and girders) to span long 2014d]) 
distances. Historically, their relatively low natural 
frequencies made some of these bridges 
susceptible to damage by high winds, because such low natural frequencies could be excited by high 
winds. If resonance of the bridge occurred, large oscillations and failure followed in some cases. 
However, modern long span bridges are designed with aeroelastic wind tunnel testing that confirms 
design features and final aerodynamic properties to avoid failure during high wind events [FHWA 
2015a]. Some older long span bridges were tested and retrofitted to ensure they were not vulnerable to 
wind failures.  
Similar to roads, failure of an individual bridge causes a disruption to the local road network, but does not 
always cause a major disruption of an entire communitys road network because there are often 
alternative routes. However, the drivers commute time might increase. Failure of a bridge puts additional 
stress on other parts of the road network locally, because the bridge is a choke point, which could cause 
people to avoid certain areas and thus businesses. Therefore, when communities evaluate the design and 
functionality of their bridges, they should consider the purpose of the structure and redundancy of the 
surrounding road network. For example, if the bridge is the only way road through which commuters and 
goods can access an area of the community that has many businesses and critical facilities, the bridge 
should be designed for the extreme event, as defined in Chapter 4 (Volume I). However, given that bridge 
failures are not common in hazard events, most bridges should be designed and built for the expected 
event.  
90 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Road Tunnels. Road tunnels serve a similar purpose to bridges in the road network. They connect links of 
the road network by passing under water, through mountains, or under other roads or highways. In 
general, tunnels present more risk to life safety when failures occur than other transportation systems, 
which have more accessible methods of egress. Fires in tunnels are deadly hazards because fire in an 
enclosed space decreases oxygen levels, contains toxic gases, and radiates heat like a furnace [Meng & 
Qu 2010]. Precipitation is another threat: flooding in surrounding areas can lead to dangerously high soil 
moisture levels that compromise structural integrity of tunnels through mountains [Meyer et al. 2014]. 
Tunnels beneath rivers are not affected by moisture through the walls but by surrounding flooding 
through the tunnel portal. During long term inundation inside a tunnel, corrosion is a major mode of 
damage, especially to any ventilation, electrical, or communications systems within the structure. More 
resilient designs and novel protection measures, such as inflatable tunnel plugs, may need to be employed 
to adequately mitigate the risk associated with tunnels [U.S. DHS 2013]. 
13.2.2. Rail 
Rail systems consist of mass transit systems, such as subways, that operate within large high-density 
cities; regional commuter rail systems, which connect suburban communities to the city core; intercity 
passenger rail systems; and freight rail systems that transport cargo both regionally and across the nation. 
Light rail systems that operate within cities and airports are also included. 
Rail systems, which typically carry bulk commodities and assist in commuter services, have seen a boom 
in recent years. Amtrak reported more than 31.2 million passengers in 2012, double the reported figure 
from 2000. Freight railroads transport almost half the nations intercity freight and approximately a third 
of its exports with both numbers projected to increase. Freight and passenger railroads invested $75 
billion into freight rail systems since 2009. In 2010, freight railroads renewed enough miles of track to go 
from coast to coast. This investment policy supports the rail system capacity to meet future needs and 
represents an opportune time to build resilience into the system [ASCE 2013]. 
Since rail systems tend to be less interconnected than roadway systems, key juncture points may become 
bottlenecks following system damage or failure [Lazo 2013]. One example is the Virginia Avenue tunnel 
in Washington D.C., through which 20 to 30 cargo trains travel each day. The tunnel, now 110 years old 
with structural issues estimated to cost $200 million to repair, has a single rail line that requires freight 
trains to wait while others pass through [Lazo 2013]. Bottlenecks like this cost the U.S. about $200 billion 
annually, or 1.6 % of GDP, and are projected to rise if rail capacity is not added along significant 
corridors [ASCE 2013]. Any disruption to these key points in the system could cause significant 
economic disruptions, indicating a need to build alternate routes to increase redundancy in the system. 
Freight rail systems in the U.S. also play an important role in the intermodal transportation of 
containerized cargo and imported automobiles from ports on both coasts to points in the Midwest. 
Containers are double stacked on rail cars and transported to interior distribution hubs that then transfer 
cargo to trucks, which is then taken to a final destinations. 
91 
I  
Transportation Systems  
The railway network is similar to road and 
highway infrastructure; both rely on bridges and 
tunnels. However, the railway network is not as 
redundant as local road networks. Thus 
disruptions in the railway network can have a 
significant impact. During Hurricane Katrina, 
flooding caused railway tracks to be impassible 
and some railway bridges failed, as shown in 
Figure 13-4. Careful planning can ensure tracks 
are appropriately elevated and mitigated for 
potential natural hazards. Relocating transit lines 
to newer tracks reduces natural hazard risks and 
vulnerability, as does keeping older tracks in good  
repair for redundancy. Since railways, like Figure 13-4: A railroad bridge in New Orleans 
roadways, are replaced every 20 years on average, was washed out by flooding during Hurricane 
resilience can be built into the system over time Katrina. (Source: Photo by Marvin Nauman 
[Field et al. 2012]. [FEMA 2014c]) 
Rail systems have other vulnerabilities. Most 
regional and intercity passenger rail systems either 
rely on electrified overhead catenaries or on third-rail power. While overhead catenary systems are more 
vulnerable to damage in storms from winds, falling trees, and branches, both are vulnerable to flooding, 
ice storms, and blizzards. Passenger rail in rural areas uses diesel locomotives and is more resilient. Some 
railroads have invested in hybrid locomotives that can be powered by diesel or electric power and be 
deployed to restore limited service when there is loss of electric power. Freight rail cargo is transported 
by diesel locomotives and so is less affected by storms, ice and flooding.  
An early warning system prior to a hazard event allows time for trains are to be moved to safer locations 
to avoid damage. As with other forms of transportation, damage and recovery assessments will enable 
better prioritization of resources and lead to faster recovery in a post-hazard environment [The World 
Bank 2012].  
Subway Systems. Subway systems effectively 
transport many people for work, school, Resilience Example: The New York City Transit 
entertainment events, or other leisure (NYCT) subway system, despite being one of the 
activities. Because subways are largely located oldest transportation infrastructures in the city, 
underground, flooding is especially showcased adaptability in its response to the 9/11 
problematic. During Hurricane Sandy, the attacks. Decision making was dispersed 
New York City subway system experienced throughout the system. As a result of empowered 
heavy flooding; some tunnels filled up leadership throughout the system, trains were 
entirely. Where protective measures, such as quickly rerouted around the disrupted area. When 
barriers and elevated openings, were in place, the nature of the event became clear, the subway 
they were overtopped. The subway pumps system brought more trains to outgoing tracks for 
were overwhelmed and the flooding damaged evacuation. During the recovery, the system was 
utility equipment, including electrical systems adapted to transport emergency personnel and 
(transformers, switchgear, distribution panels, supplies into and around the city [PWC 2013].  
etc.), communication and data/IT systems, and 
electronic controls and equipment [FEMA 2013]. The severe damage to the subway system will require 
years of repair and rebuilding before every station is reopened [City of New York 2013].  
92 
I  
Transportation Systems  
13.2.3. Air 
The nations air infrastructure provides the fastest way for freight and people to travel long distances. The 
airport system moves over $562 billion in cargo each year, in addition to providing 728 million passenger 
flights [ASCE 2013]. Commercial flights increased by approximately 33 million from 2000 to 2011 
[ASCE 2013]. By 2040, it is projected that air cargo will triple and over a billion passenger flights will 
traverse the nations skies [ASCE 2013]. Studies already show that disruptions to this massive system has 
significant economic implications. The estimated cost of congestion and delays was almost $22 billion in 
2012 and is projected to rise to $63 billion by 2040, if national spending levels on air infrastructure 
remains stagnant [ASCE 2013]. 
Airports are a key component of supply chain for commerce activities. Internet purchases in particular 
result in tons of overnight air cargo transferred to trucks at airports and delivered to communities. There is 
a strong dependency between airports and roadway systems for timely delivery of high priority and 
perishable goods. Airport closures cause re-routing to other airports with longer truck travel times, 
delaying goods. 
Large airports are communities in themselves where many people are employed and there is significant 
retail business and real-estate development, such as hotels. When an airport is closed, it does not just 
impact air travelers. People employed at airports are significantly affected by disruptions to normal air 
operations. 
There are many dependencies between airports and other modes of transport. Passengers access airports 
by roadways or rail networks. Freight services and the provision of fuel to airports rely on roadways. In 
addition, when airports are disrupted, people and cargo are typically re-routed to road and rail networks.  
Military airbases typically have facilities similar to those of a civilian airport, such as traffic control and 
firefighting. Airbases are located throughout the U.S. and its territories and provide a variety of services 
for the military such as refueling, storage and maintenance, training centers, and mission launch points. 
As with civilian air infrastructure, military air infrastructure provides the fastest way to transport 
personnel, cargo, arms, supplies, and other physical assets. As such, airbases play a critical role in 
supporting national security.  
Disaster response is not a primary role of the armed forces; however, after major events, military airbases 
may double as launch points and staging areas for recovery operations. When federal, state, and local 
agencies respond to hazard events that have become disasters, the military may be called on for support. 
Increased air transportation capabilities are particularly needed after hazard events that hinder ground 
transportation, such as floods, earthquakes, wildfires, and major snow storms, or after hazard events in 
areas with prohibitive terrain. Common response-related uses for military aircraft, include evacuation, 
search and rescue, supply delivery, and personnel mobilization. Airbases are governed by the branch of 
the military they serve, though assets may be provided to civilian governments under civilian control after 
a major event.  
Unfortunately, airports are sensitive to hazard events and prone to disruptions. Seventy percent of airport 
delays are due to severe weather events, which may become more frequent in some locations [ACRP 
2012]. This sensitivity is partly attributed to system complexity, which can include more risks than are 
immediately obvious [PWC 2013]. Thus, completely assessing all vulnerabilities for an airport can be 
difficult. Nevertheless, valuable lessons can be learned from past events.  
93 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Runways are vulnerable to the same hazards as 
roads, but typically have a higher threshold for 
safe operating conditions. Runways can be shut 
down by flooding (Figure 13-5), ice, and snow. 
Additionally, runways are vulnerable to soil 
liquefaction during seismic events [ACRP 2012]. 
In 2011, the area around the Dallas Fort Worth 
airport received 6.6 cm (2.6 inches) of snow 
before the Super Bowl. The airport was 
underprepared and suffered significant disruptions. 
Their equipment cleared a single runway one hour 
after de-icer was applied, leading to cancellation 
of over 300 flights. In response, the airport  
invested over $13 million in equipment to clear Figure 13-5: Flooding in 1993 closed the Chester 
three runways of 5 cm (2 inches) of snow in 14 County Airport and moved planes. (Source: Photo 
minutes. Although this is a good example of steps by Andrea Booher [FEMA 2014b]) 
taken to create a more resilient airport, it also 
showcases how easily an unexpected weather 
event can cause disruptions [TRB 2014]. 
Airport terminals are vulnerable to the same hazards as other buildings (see Chapter 12). Energy, fuel, 
communications, water, and wastewater services are all critical to the safe operation of airports. Chapters 
14, 15 and 16, respectively, discuss the resiliency of these infrastructure systems. 
Airports play an integral role in moving people and supplies before and after a hazard event. If airports in 
an area close, other airports must handle redirected flights and increased loads [ACRP 2012]. Federal and 
state aid is most quickly administered by air. These factors mean that airports are most needed when they 
are most vulnerable  directly before and after a hazard event. Therefore, increasing resilience in airports 
is essential to increasing overall community resilience.  
13.2.4. Ports, Harbors, and Waterways 
Ports, harbors, and waterways are primarily used for import/export of goods and materials. The U.S. 
Army Corps of Engineers estimates that over 95 % of U.S. trade, by volume, moves through ports [ASCE 
2013]. The U.S. has over 300 commercial harbors that process over 2.3 billion tons of cargo per year and 
over 600 additional smaller harbors [ASCE 2013]. In 2010, $460 billion worth of goods were exported 
and $940 billion were imported through ports [ASCE 2013]. Although most ports are in good condition, 
terminals need further investment to accommodate larger vessels following the scheduled 2015 Panama 
Canal expansion. Due to the increasing size of commercial ships, many ports with shallow waterways are 
already inaccessible. Once the Panama Canal expansion is complete, more ports in the  will 
be unable to service the larger ships that may have double the capacity of cargo ships in use today 
[NOAA 2014]. The need for further investment, as with the other transportation systems, provides an 
opportunity to plan for resilient improvements to this critical infrastructure [ASCE 2013]. 
Maritime infrastructure also provides waterborne transport of passengers and vehicles, which is another 
important component of domestic trade [MARAD 2015]. Ferries provide a safe and reliable link across 
bodies of water for commuters in major metropolitan areas where tunnels and bridges are not available or 
traffic is congested. Additionally, ferries can support emergency evacuations of metropolitan areas when 
other transportation networks are inundated, gridlocked, or otherwise non-functional. According to the 
Bureau of Transportation Statistics, there were 231 ferry operators across 37 states and territories in 2009. 
It is estimated that U.S. ferries carried close to 103 million passengers and over 37 million vehicles in 
94 
I  
Transportation Systems  
2009 [RITA 2009]. In New York City, the Staten Island Ferry carries approximately 70,000 passengers 
on a typical weekday [NYC DOT 2015]. 
Water transportation systems are by nature located in vulnerable areas. Port placement and design can 
reduce vulnerability to some hazards or reduce recovery time. Early warning systems for ship owners and 
port authorities give facilities and watercraft time to prepare or evacuate [The World Bank 2012].  
Hurricanes and other heavy precipitation events 
can lead to extreme flooding and overtopping 
and damage to structures, dislodge containers 
(Figure 13-6), undermine foundations, and 
destroy buildings outright. Hazardous chemical 
and oil spills are also a risk. Flooding can also 
deposit silt and debris, which may restrict or 
close navigable channels.  
Overwhelmed or failed drainage systems can 
lead to flooding in areas that would otherwise 
be unaffected by storm surge or riverine 
flooding. This vulnerability may be caused by 
existing infrastructure that has inadequate  
capacity. High winds associated with these Figure 13-6: Shipping containers are displaced by 
types of events can damage critical equipment, high winds and storm surge following Katrina in 
such as cranes and structures [URS 2012].  2005. (Source: Photo by Win Henderson [FEMA 
Port managers reported after Hurricane Sandy 2014e]) 
that storm surge caused the significant damage. 
The storm surge, combined with debris, slammed facilities and equipment and made road and rail access 
impossible. Administrative offices located on the first floors of buildings were shut down, resulting in a 
loss of port management. In addition, flooding damaged new technology, such as electric motors to move 
cranes. The loss of electric power affected night lighting for operations, nuclear detection for incoming 
and outgoing cargo, and traffic signals around the port. When power did return in stages, the grid voltage 
combined with generators running a few critical systems repeatedly tripped circuit breakers. In parking 
lots, approximately 16,000 cars belonging to cruise passengers were flooded. Piers and wharves 
performed well, because they are designed to withstand a ship impact laterally and the weight of a 
shipping container vertically, which are forces that far exceed loads imposed by the storm. Although there 
was no loss of life at the ports during the storm, this event illustrated how a number of systems can be 
damaged that affect operations during or after a hazard event. Details like moving offices to the second 
floor, raising crane motors or constructing watertight housing for them, and having a system for recovery 
coordination with key utilities can make a huge difference [Wakeman 2013]. 
Drought can also stress shipping routes and maritime infrastructure. Inland waterways are particularly 
susceptible to drought. As water recedes during a drought, the navigable portion of a waterway may be 
restricted or completely cut off, which creates congestion for shipping traffic [U.S. FTA 2013]. Even 
when drought-affected waterways remain navigable, reduced depth may require vessels to reduce loads 
and speed, which hampers efficiency and increases shipping costs. Drought can also threaten commercial 
and municipal infrastructure that is specifically designed for fresh water. As freshwater discharge from a 
rivers mouth decreases, coastal salt water may enter upstream freshwater areas, and corrode 
infrastructure [Elliott 2013]. 
Sea level rise (SLR) can potentially cause severe damage or loss of functionality to maritime 
infrastructure. Globally, the sea level is estimated to rise by 178 to 584 mm (7 to 23 inches) by 2099. As 
SLR combines with high tides or storm surge events, there is an increasing threat to port infrastructure. 
Resulting changes in sediment movement may lead to siltation along channel entrances, affecting 
95 
I  
Transportation Systems  
accessibility for some ships. The risk of corrosion increases as more infrastructure comes into contact 
with the water. Susceptibility to scour and flooding may be exacerbated by SLR [Wakeman 2013]. 
As with other transportation modes there are dependencies on other infrastructure systems. For example, 
road and rail infrastructure transport goods and people to and from ports and harbors to their final 
destination. Ferries can provide a temporary replacement for bridge infrastructure. However, the lack of 
docking requirement standardization limits the transferability of vessels and infrastructure to support 
efforts following a hazard event.  
Inland waterways in the U.S. move large volumes of bulk cargo through a system of rivers and lakes 
interconnected by locks. As shown in Figure 13-7, one barge, which can carry 1,500 tons of cargo, moves 
the equivalent tonnage of 13.4 jumbo freight rail hopper cars or 58 large semi-trucks. A large barge tow, 
consisting of 15 barges, can transport the equivalent of 870 large semi-trucks. When the inland waterways 
flood or there is a bridge collapse blocking a key river on their route, there is tremendous delay to bulk 
cargo movement that cannot be made up by other modes of freight transportation. 
 
Figure 13-7: Iowa DOT comparison chart 
Inland navigable waterways are crucial to the health of the U.S. trade economy. Shallow draft navigation 
(e.g., barges) serves 87 % of all major U.S. cities, which accounts for 79 % of all domestic waterborne 
freight [MARAD 2015]. In 2005, inland waterways handled over 624 million tons of freight valued over 
$70 billion [Kruse et al. 2007]. The U.S. Maritime Administration estimates that if inland waterways 
became unavailable for transport, truck traffic on rural highways would increase by approximately 33 % 
96 
I  
Transportation Systems  
(58 million truck trips annually) and rail transport, by tonnage, would increase by 25 %. Increases of these 
magnitudes would put tremendous stress on land-based infrastructure, resulting in increased maintenance 
costs, fuel consumption, congestion, and decreased safety. As waterways are maintained and improved, 
resilience to lasting drought conditions should be a chief consideration in affected areas of the country.  
13.2.5. Pipelines 
Pipelines are a key component of the U.S. transportation and energy supply infrastructure, delivering 
natural gas, crude oil, refined products such as gasoline and diesel, and natural gas liquids such as ethane 
and propane. Because the engineering standards for pipeline safety and design are administered by the 
U.S. Department of Transportations Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), 
pipelines that transport natural gas and liquid fuels are discussed here as part of the transportation system.  
The regulation and enforcement of safety for all types of pipelines are the responsibility of the PHMSA. 
A combination of federal, state, and local agencies are responsible for siting pipelines and their economic 
regulation (e.g., rates and tariffs).  
Pipelines are generally grouped into three categories based on function: gathering (small pipelines in an 
oil or gas production area), transmission (larger, longer pipelines transporting products from supply areas 
to market areas), and distribution (pipelines delivering the product to residential, commercial or industrial 
end users). Including both onshore and offshore lines, there are approximately 482,000 km (300,000 
miles) of natural gas transmission pipelines, and 3.4 million km (2.1 million miles) of distribution 
pipelines delivering over 730 million cubic meters (26 billion cubic feet) of natural gas. Over 306,000 km 
(190,000 miles) of liquids pipeline delivered nearly 15 billion barrels of crude oil and petroleum products 
in 2013. Over the last 10 years, liquids pipeline has increased by 41,404 km (25,727 miles) or 15.4 %, 
with crude oil pipeline mileage growing 18,744 km (11,647 miles) or 23.6 % since 2004 [AOPL 2014].  
Pipelines connect to compression and pumping stations, processing 
facilities, production platforms, wells, storage facilities and end 
users, such as power plants and residential or commercial customers. 
Disruptions of the pipeline system by hazards complicate, hinder, 
and prolong response and recovery by communities.  
Pipelines and associated aboveground facilities are vulnerable to 
damage by flooding and storm surge, impact from flood or 
windborne debris, and movement of land both on and offshore 
(earthquakes, subsidence, mudslides). Impacts to, or movement of, a 
pipeline can cause the line to rupture and spill contents into the soil 
or a body of water, or some products may ignite or explode. 
Cascading effects of pipeline disruptions include delays and fuel 
supply loss for the transportation system and natural gas to the 
energy infrastructure. Such losses can affect 1) the movement of 
responders and goods into affected areas and 2) power distribution to 
residents, businesses, and industry. 
Hurricanes can laterally displace or expose buried offshore pipes,  
which can cause leaks at clamps, welds, flanges, and fittings, and Figure 13-8: Natural gas crew 
can cause pipes to be pulled apart and rupture. Earthquakes can shuts off gas after Hurricane 
damage pipes by ground deformation  landslides, liquefaction and Sandy. [Source: Liz Roll, 
lateral movement of pipes  and by ground wave propagation or FEMA 2012] 
ground shaking [Ballantyne 2008]. Such displacements and forces 
can result in pipe compression or wrinkling, and cracking and 
separation at joints, welds, flanges, and fittings [Ballantyne 2008]. 
97 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Hurricane Katrina caused extensive damage to offshore natural gas facilities that resulted in releases of 
gas from pipelines in 72 locations [DNV 2007]. Damage to fuel refining and natural gas processing 
facilities from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita resulted in a loss of about 8 % of the nations capability to 
refine and process fuels, which significantly reduced the domestic supply [DNV 2007]. In addition, the 
damage also caused the equivalent of nearly an 11 % loss of an average days total gas consumption for 
the entire country [DNV 2007].  
By comparison, Hurricane Sandy damaged petroleum refineries, not pipelines. Because the refineries 
were offline, petroleum movement was significantly slowed in the pipelines to compensate for the loss of 
the supporting facilities. Fuel supplies were reduced from the Gulf Coast up the East Coast to New Jersey 
and New York, creating a supply chain problem in New Jersey and New York. Yet, the facility damage 
did not result in the long term effects that the damage from Hurricane Katrina caused in 2005 [EIA 2012].  
The Northridge (1994), Washington State (1997), 
and the Napa, California (2014) earthquakes 
damaged pipelines for natural gas. The damage led 
to a fire (Northridge, Napa) and an explosion 
(Washington State), causing additional property 
damage [Ballantyne 2008]. Figure 13-9 shows an 
example of property damage caused by fire from 
broken gas lines. 
The PHMSA identified five areas for local 
governments to develop mitigation strategies to 
improve protection of pipelines and increase the 
resiliency of the transmission system: 1) pipeline  
awareness (education and outreach), 2) pipeline Figure 13-9: Fire damage from broken gas lines 
mapping, 3) excavation damage prevention, 4) land [Source: Christopher Mardorf, FEMA 2014] 
use and development planning near transmission 
pipelines, and 5) emergency response to pipeline 
emergencies [PHMSA 2013]. Identifying pipeline 
locations and entering the information into the National Pipeline Mapping System is part of Step 2, 
characterizing the built environment (see Volume 1). Knowing where pipelines are located is important to 
comprehensive resilience planning. Design or placement of pipes to avoid liquefaction zones, seismic 
faults, areas of subsidence, and floodplains are only possible if the pipeline location and the hazards are 
known and mapped. Similarly, local government can create a buffer zone around pipelines to provide an 
additional margin of safety for nearby residents and businesses and to provide improved access for repair 
or emergency response equipment. Structural mitigation measures can help to mitigate seismic damage, 
such as replacing older pipes with modern steel piping and electric arc welded joints, avoiding use of 
anchors to allow the pipe movement with the ground, applying a coating or covering to minimize soil 
friction and improve pipe movement, installing an automated control system for quick shutdown of 
damaged pipeline systems, and constructing parallel pipelines to add redundancy in the system 
[Ballantyne 2008]. 
The American Lifelines Association [ALA 2005] identified the high-level performance metrics for 
pipeline systems shown in Table 13-1. A qualitative ranking of hazards to typical pipeline system 
components and facilities from the ALA [2005] study is reproduced in Table 13-2.  
It should be noted that over the last several years cybersecurity issues for pipeline systems have become 
an increased concern. Federal agencies, including the Department of Homeland Security, work with 
companies to improve security of computer-based pipeline control systems. 
 
98 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Table 13-1: The American Lifelines Association high-level performance metrics for pipeline systems 
[Adapted from ALA 2005] 
System Performance Metrics 
Desired Outcomes  
(Performance Goals) Service Disruption Casualties  
Capital  Revenue  Downtime  Lost  
(% Service (Deaths, 
Losses ($) Losses ($) (hours) Product 
Population) Injuries) 
Protect public and utility 
    X X 
personnel safety 
Maintain system reliability   X X   
Prevent monetary loss X X X X  X 
Prevent environmental damage      X 
99 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Table 13-2: Qualitative Ranking of Hazard Vulnerability for Typical Pipeline System Components and 
Facilities [Adapted from ALA 2005] 
Degree of Vulnerability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hazards   
 
Facilities
Transmission PipelinesPump StationsCompressor StationsProcessing Storage TanksControl SystemsMaintenance Operations Buildings and EquipmentPressure Regulations / Metering StationsDistribution PipelinesService Lines or Connections
Natural Hazards           
Earthquake Shaking L M M M H M H L L M 
Earthquake Permanent Ground H - - - L - - L H M 
Deformations (fault rupture, (Buried) 
liquefaction, landslide and 
settlement) 
Ground Movements (landslide, H - - - L - - L H M 
frost heave, settlement) (Buried) 
Flooding (riverine, storm surge, L H H H M H H H L M 
tsunami and seiche) 
Wind (hurricane, tornado) L - - - - L L - - - 
(Aerial) 
Icing L - - - - - - - L - 
Collateral Hazard: Blast or Fire M H H H H M L L L M 
Collateral Hazard: Dam L H H H M H H H L M 
Inundation 
Collateral Hazard: Nearby - L L L - L L L M L 
Collapse 
Human Threats           
Physical Attack (biological, M M M M - M M - M - 
chemical, radiological and blast) 
Cyber Attack - L L L - H L - L - 
Note: Degrees of vulnerability: H = High, M = Moderate, L = Low. When a component or system is located within a 
building, the vulnerability of both the building and component should be considered. For example, where there is a 
potential for building collapse or mandatory evacuation, the equipment housed within is at risk. The entries in this 
table assume that the component was constructed after 1945. 
100 
I  
Transportation Systems  
13.3. Performance Goals 
Performance goals for the transportation system should align with the broader community goals 
established (see Step 3, Determine goals and objectives in Volume 1). Key stakeholders within the 
community, including owners, engineers, planners, regulators, codes and standards representatives, and 
representatives of other infrastructure systems (e.g., power and water/wastewater) should help develop or 
review the performance goals. Transportation system users may include commuters, school districts, 
emergency response services, local businesses, and other private and commercial property owners. 
Transportation stakeholders may include state DOT, city DOT, township engineer, transit authorities, 
highway authorities, airport authorities, Amtrak, freight and short line railroads, independent taxi, bus, 
marine, airline and truck operators,  Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), FHWA, Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), Federal Transit Administration 
(FTA),  Coast Guard (USCG), state, city and township code officials, American Association 
of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), American Railway Engineering and 
Maintenance-of-Way Association (AREMA), state, city and township Office of Emergency Medical 
Services (EMS).  
For transportation systems, it is imperative that other infrastructure systems be involved in establishing 
the performance goals, because they have strong dependencies on transportation systems, as discussed in 
Section 13.1.2. For example, both overhead and underground distribution lines for power and 
communication systems are often within the right-of-way of roads and bridges, thus are subject to DOT 
requirements. Water, gas, and wastewater utilities may also have buried lines within the road right-of-
way. Passenger and light rail systems are heavily reliant on energy systems.  
The example performance goals table in Table 13-3 allows communities to summarize the desired (future) 
and anticipated (current) performance of transportation systems for the hazard event specified in the 
Disturbance table (top left table in Table 13-3). Performance goals in this Guide are defined as time to 
recovery of function after a hazard event. Example performance goals for the fictional community of 
Riverbend, USA, are provided Volume I. These example performance goals are intended to illustrate the 
6-step process.  
The example table for performance goals has three functional categories for general transportation 
services that support: ingress, egress and community resilience. Ingress refers to transportation of goods, 
services and first responders into a community immediately after a hazard event and in the period of 
rebuilding and recovery. Egress refers to the need to evacuate the population before and immediately after 
a hazard event. The transportation network must be viable and able to provide safe egress for all people 
located in the affected community. Community recovery addresses transportation systems that support 
recovery of building clusters and other community needs. For example, segments of the transportation 
network will need to provide passage to the critical facilities directly after an event. Additional segments 
will need to support businesses when they re-open several days or weeks later.  
Recovery times are broken down into three main phases: short-term, intermediate, and long-term. The 
short term phase (0-3 days) supports immediate recovery of the community. The intermediate recovery 
phase (1-12 weeks) supports the return of individuals and businesses to their daily functions. The long 
term recovery phase (4-36+ months) supports the need to rebuild, retrofit, and strengthen the 
transportation network. 
101 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Table 13-3: Example transportation infrastructure performance goals table to be filled out by a 
community and its stakeholders 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Any  30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine, Design, Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized, Community, Regional  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual, Moderate, Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Transportation Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Ingress (goods, services, disaster relief) 
Local Roads, Bridges and Tunnels                
State Highways, Bridges and Tunnels                
National Highways, Bridges and Tunnels                
Regional Airport                
National/International Airport                
Military Airports                
Marine Port                
Ferry Terminal                
Subway Station                
Rail Stations                
Egress (emergency egress, evacuation, etc) 
Local Roads, Bridges and Tunnels                
State Highways, Bridges and Tunnels                
National Highways, Bridges and Tunnels                
Regional Airport                
National/Int'l Airport                
Military Airports                
Subway Station                
Ferry Terminal                
Rail Stations                
Community Recovery 
Critical Facilities 
Hospitals                   
Police and Fire Stations                   
Emergency Operational Centers                   
Emergency Housing 
Residences                   
Emergency Responder Housing                   
Public Shelters                   
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Essential City Service Facilities           
Schools           
Medical Provider Offices           
Retail           
Community Recovery 
Residences           
Neighborhood retail           
Offices and work places           
Non-emergency City Services           
All businesses           
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90 % restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
102 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Each community should identify and plan for prevailing hazards that may have significant negative 
impact on the built environment. A full discussion of hazard types and level is given in Chapter 4 
(Volume I).  
The affected area of a given hazard event, which often depends on the type and intensity of the hazard, is 
identified to support resilience planning. For example, earthquake and hurricanes typically have large 
affected areas, whereas tornadoes and tsunamis have relatively small affected areas. The affected area 
indicates the extent of potential damage by the hazard event, including surrounding communities, which 
will impact the duration of the recovery process.  
The disruption level, on the other hand, is a general estimate of potential disruption to the existing 
transportation infrastructure system as a whole, and should be specified as minor, moderate, or severe.  
Table 13-4 provides an example performance goals table for pipelines. The pipeline systems most likely 
to affect a community are distribution systems for liquid fuels and natural gas, rather than production or 
transmission systems. Because natural gas and oil serve similar functions as electric power in the 
residential and commercial markets, the functional categories listed in Table 13-4 are essentially the same 
as the corresponding performance goal tables for electric transmission and distribution systems in Chapter 
13. 
To establish performance goals for transportation systems, it is necessary to prioritize the transportation 
systems and components that support the desired community response and recovery based on its role in 
the community. The ability of each system to effectively serve its function is a balance of the volume of 
people or goods that the system can move and its interface with the local community it serves. For 
example, highways are designed as networks for evacuation and egress. Local streets feed state county 
routes, which feed state highways, which feed interstate highways. The capacity of each branch is 
commensurate with the demand. If a local street is blocked, a detour to another street can be found and 
the impact on traffic congestion is small. If a major interstate highway is blocked, the consequences are 
more significant because detour routes will be needed for large traffic volumes. 
In turn, highway design standards are most stringent for interstate highways because they are critical for 
movement of people and goods. They are graded to be above flood plains, trees are cut back from the 
shoulders, rock slopes are well back of shoulders, and they are well maintained. State highways are next 
in the level of performance standards and numbered county routes follow.  
When establishing performance goals for transportation system infrastructure, adherence to state, federal 
and industry standards may pose some limitations. In most cases design standards and specifications for 
transportation infrastructure establish minimum requirements that can be exceeded. However, in some 
states, legislation prevents local jurisdictions from exceeding state standards and specifications.  
Each performance improvement has an associated financial cost, time table, and possible inconvenience 
to the community to modify existing infrastructure. Obtaining funds from the state or federal government 
will require supporting documentation to establish community benefits that justify the cost expenditures. 
Solutions that serve the interests of multiple stakeholders and lead to win-win situations are more likely to 
gain widespread community support and the support of elected officials. 
103 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Table 13-4: Example pipelines performance goals table to be filled out by community and its 
stakeholders 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Any  30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine, Design, Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized, Community, Regional  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual, Moderate, Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Pipelines Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Distribution 
Critical Response Facilities and Support Systems 
Hospitals, Police and Fire Stations           
Emergency Operations Centers           
Debris/recycling centers           
Related lifeline systems           
Emergency Housing and Support Systems 
Public Shelters (General Population, Animal, etc.)           
Food distribution centers           
Nursing homes, transitional housing           
Emergency shelter for response/recovery workforce           
Related lifeline systems           
Housing and Neighborhood infrastructure 
Essential city services facilities           
Schools           
Medical provider offices           
Houses of worship/meditation/ exercise           
Buildings/space for social services (e.g., child           
services) and prosecution activities 
Food distribution from local grocery stores (location           
known by community) 
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
Residential housing restoration           
Commercial and industrial businesses           
Non-emergency city services           
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
Residential housing restoration           
Commercial and industrial businesses           
Non-emergency city services           
Related lifeline systems           
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90 % restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
104 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Similarly, highway bridges and road tunnels are part of the highway infrastructure and cannot be 
prioritized separately from the highway they connect. Bridges on interstate highways are more important 
than bridges on state highways and county routes when it comes to egress and ingress. Bridges or tunnels 
that are part of a subway or rail system that relies on them cannot be prioritized separately. 
The logic for prioritizing roadways may be extended to all transportation infrastructure serving a 
community. The following transportation systems and their role in supporting community functions are 
summarized for consideration when setting transportation system performance goals: 
1. Evacuation routes and emergency access routes are designated to function as a network that 
transfers vehicles from local streets, to county routes, state highways, and interstate highways, 
moving travelers to higher ground or away from other hazards, such as a nuclear power plant. 
Highways may have intelligent transportation systems (ITS) to alert travelers of travel times, 
detours, and potential traffic congestion that can be avoided. ITS devices like cameras, sensors 
and variable message signs let traffic command centers communicate with travelers in vehicles to 
direct them. Evacuation plans may reverse the direction of highways, so all travel lanes are 
outbound, away from the hazard. 
2. Interstate highways are constructed to higher standards and carry the highest volume of vehicles, 
which makes them critical in the road system. 
3. State highways are important for similar reasons to those listed above. 
4. Numbered county routes (numbered parts of complete systems). 
5. Pipelines serving energy systems in the community. In the short-term phase, ruptured natural gas, 
fuel, water, and wastewater lines need to be repaired to support recovery. 
6. Buses use all the highway routes described above. Bus fleets should be protected, fueled, and 
strategically located and staged to support egress. They can move the greatest volumes of people, 
especially those in communities who do not own vehicles. In the short-term phase, they can also 
move the largest volume of relief and recovery workers to an area. In evacuation planning it is 
preferable that people who do not have access to automobiles use buses instead of taxis or livery 
vehicles, since it results in less highway congestion. 
7. In large cities, subway mass transit systems are generally designed to collect commuters traveling 
to the city center from their local communities via walking, bicycle, bus, regional rail, park and 
ride lots, and livery vehicles. Subway lines also connect at transfer stations, which serve as hubs 
to allow commuters to get to the specific destination station closest to where they work. At the 
end of the business day they perform these functions in reverse. Subway systems are capable of 
moving large volumes of people for egress purposes away from a hazard in the city center. When 
used for ingress purposes, the subway routes will likely allow passengers to use transfer stations 
to reach a point close to their destinations if their normal destination station is closed. Subways 
may not be useful for egress or ingress for events other than those described here. For this reason 
they follow buses in priority. 
8. Light rail transit systems often link communities, the town center, and other modes of 
transportation, such as airports or passenger rail stations. They transport much lower volumes of 
passengers at lower speeds than mass transit systems, but provide more frequent service with 
shorter headways between trains. In general, light rail systems are not as resilient as other rail 
systems. They do not operate in high winds and have problems with icing, since they are either 
powered by overhead electric catenaries or have electric bus bars similar to, but less robust than, 
third rails. 
9. Regional rail is generally designed to collect commuters traveling to the city center from local 
suburban communities via local stations or distribute them in the reverse direction. Travel to 
105 
I  
Transportation Systems  
stations is by automobile, taxi, livery car, walking, or bicycle. Some stations are hubs with larger 
park and ride lots or garages. Regional rail usually feeds a multimodal train terminal station in the 
city or town center where passengers extend their trip to their ultimate destination by intercity 
rail, subway, bus transit systems, or taxis. Examples of regional rail are Penn Station in New 
York City and Union Station in Washington, DC. Regional rail can serve for egress or ingress; 
however, travelers evacuating from the suburbs need to know if other transportation systems they 
rely on for connections are functioning. 
10. Intercity rail, such as Amtrak, can be used for egress of travelers who need to return to their 
community, or residents evacuating to other communities. In the ingress mode, it can bring 
recovery workers from distant cities unaffected by the hazard event. Intercity rail stations are 
generally in the town center or city center and are well connected to the regional rail or local 
subway or bus transit system with taxi and rental car service. 
11. Freight rail lines connect to major distribution centers in inland cities and to major port facilities 
on the coasts. Use for egress would include removal of debris and refuse. Use for ingress would 
include recovery supplies, bulk cargo, and heavy equipment. 
12. National or international airports can be used by travelers returning home, or community 
residents evacuating to other cities. In the ingress mode, they can receive large volumes of 
emergency aid as air cargo and bring recovery workers from large distances unaffected by the 
hazard event. Airports are generally well connected to the regional highway network, which is 
likely to be the first local transportation system functioning after a hazard event. They may also 
be connected to regional rail, subway systems, or light rail systems. 
13. Regional airports can function similar to national or international airports to serve communities 
that are outside of large cities. The highway networks that support these airports should be sized 
according to the lower volumes of cargo and passengers they transport. 
14. Marine ports are comprised of docks, waterways, locks, and supporting upland facilities, which 
include cargo storage and distribution centers, cargo and container cranes, intermodal freight rail 
yards, and truck transfer and inspection facilities. Egress at these facilities involves scheduling 
large container ships and cargo vessels to divert to other ports, and diverting rail and truck 
exports to other ports. Ingress for recovery supplies and bulk and container cargo can only take 
place after restoration of the docks, waterways, locks, supporting upland facilities, and the 
connecting highways and rail yards. 
15. Large ferry vessels move significant volumes of people across bodies of water that otherwise 
would require long travel distances by other modes of transportation. Examples are the ferry 
system in San Francisco and the Staten Island Ferry in New York City. They can perform this 
function well on an emergency basis for egress or ingress. Their operation, however, is limited in 
storm conditions when they are required to shut down. Large ferry systems have robust ferry 
terminal docking systems that are less likely to suffer damage during an expected storm event; 
however, in more extreme storm events they may suffer significant damage.  
16. Ferry terminals for smaller vessels carrying lower volumes of travelers do not have a big impact 
on egress, except where they may serve waterfront communities that are otherwise isolated 
(island communities). In addition, during the recovery phases, temporary ferry operations can be 
quickly established to serve communities cut off by bodies of water after the wash out of roads 
and bridges. 
106 
I  
Transportation Systems  
13.4. Regulatory Environment 
Multiple regulatory bodies at various levels of government (federal, state, and local) have authority over 
the transportation system. The transportation system is not regulated by a single regulatory body, even 
within a single transportation mode. This section discusses regulatory bodies of transportation 
infrastructure at the federal, state, and local levels. 
Federal. Federal regulatory agencies oversee transportation networks and methods of transportation used 
within those networks. These agencies promulgate policies and regulations to maintain the safety and 
security of the infrastructure and its operations. The transportation industry is overseen by a number of 
regulatory agencies that assess and monitor the diverse transportation systems, methods, and operating 
environments. Chapter 15 on water and wastewater systems covers environmental aspects including 
water, air quality, and waste management and sites environmental acts pertaining to regulations.  
Table 13-5 summarizes the methods of transportation used, typical ownership (private or public), and the 
oversight authorities involved in their regulation. Table 13-6 lists the role of key Federal agencies that 
oversee the transportation industry. 
Regional, State, and Local. Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPO) were encouraged to review the 
safety and security of their regional transportation network following the enactment of the Safe 
Accountable Flexible Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users (SAFETEA-LU) in 2005. 
FHWA funded and encouraged MPOs across the U.S. to look into ways they to foster safety and security 
planning, including resilience efforts, in the long-term capital plans that MPOs develop and fund.  
Roads, Bridges, Highways and Road Tunnels. Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century (MAP-21) 
is a bill signed into law in July 2012 [FHWA 2015b]. MAP-21 makes funds available for studies related 
to the effects of weather and natural hazards, to improve the dissemination of research products, to 
accelerate deployment of new technologies, and to ensure existing programs are informed and updated. 
MAP-21 requires the U.S. DOT to create a bureau that will oversee a national transportation library, an 
advisory council on transportation statistics, and a national database. The bill gives the option for 
developing a national data center for transportation agencies, including weather related information and 
the development of codes and standards. 
Air. The FAA regulates commercial service airports under the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), 14 
CFR Part 139, Certification of Airports. This regulation prescribes rules governing the certification and 
operation of airports in any U.S. state, the District of Columbia, or any U.S. territory or possession 
providing scheduled passenger service of an aircraft configured for more than 9 passenger seats. Advisory 
Circulars (AC) contain methods and procedures that certificate holders use to comply with the 
requirements of Part 139.  
FAA AC 150/5200-31C, Airport Emergency Plan, provides guidance to the airport operator in the 
development and implementation of an Airport Emergency Plan (AEP) that should address essential 
actions in the event of possible emergencies, including natural hazards. The guidance includes mitigation, 
such as zoning and earthquake-resistant construction, as an important component of comprehensive 
emergency management. 
Ports, Harbors, and Waterways. State regulatory agencies oversee the ports, harbors, and waterways. 
Coastal Zone Management Federal Consistency is a process that requires federal agencies to follow state 
coastal management policies when conducting a project or issuing a permit that could affect coastal 
resources. It also enables increased coordination between government agencies.  
Natural hazard mitigation may be addressed by local regulations, independent of the codes and standards 
selected. These regulations would apply to a project, such as a pier or bulkhead, whether it is proposed as 
part of development of upland property or to protect upland property from sea level rise for an extended 
period.  
107 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Table 13-5: Transportation infrastructure ownership and governing regulatory agencies 
Oversight Authority 
 
 
Method of  
Type 
 Transportation 
  
  
  
  
      
IndustryInfrastructurePublicPrivateDHSFEMANTSBUSDOTFRAFTATSAFMCSAFHWAUSCGEPAFAA1+ state agencies
Passenger Inter-City Rail X  X X X X X  X      X 
(Amtrak) 
Commuter Rail X  X X X X X X X X     X 
 Subway X  X X X X  X X      X 
RailLight Rail X  X X X X  X X      X 
Inclined Plane X  X X X X  X X      X 
Trolley/ Cable Car X  X X X X  X X      X 
Freight Class 1 Freight Carriers  X X X X X X  X      X 
 
 Passenger  Inter-City Motor coach X X X X X X   X X     X 
Intra-City Bus/Motor X X X X X X  X X X X    X 
coach 
Paratransit/ Jitneys X X X X X X  X X X X    X 
Taxis X X X X X X   X X X    X 
Surface Transport
Personal Cars  X    X         X 
Freight Commercial Trucking  X X  X X   X X X    X 
Roads, Bridges and Tunnels
Passenger  Ocean Lines  X   X X   X   X X  X 
Ferries X  X X X X  X X  X X X  X 
 
Commercial Boats  X   X X   X   X X  X 
Personal Boats  X   X X   X   X X  X 
Maritime
Freight Freighters  X X X X X   X   X X  X 
Barges  X X X X X   X   X X  X 
Passenger  Commercial Airplanes  X   X X   X    X X X 
  Blimps  X   X X   X    X X X 
AirAirDrones X X   X X   X    X X X 
Freight Commercial Air Freight  X   X X   X    X X X 
108 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Table 13-6: Role of transportation oversight agency 
Agency Role and Website 
Provides oversight of transportation networks. It includes agencies such as FHWA, 
U.S Department of FTA, FRA, FAA, Surface Transportation Board, and Maritime Administration 
Transportation (DOT) (www.dot.gov). 
Federal Highway Supports state and local governments in the design, construction and maintenance 
Administration (FHWA) of the roadway system (www.fhwa.dot.gov). 
Federal Transit Admiration Provides financial and technical support to local public transit systems 
(FTA) (www.fta.dot.gov). 
Federal Railroad Oversees heavy rail freight, commuter and inter-city passenger rail systems 
Administration (FRA) (www.fra.dot.gov). 
Federal Aviation Oversees all civil aviation in the country (www.faa.gov) 
Administration (FAA) 
Prevents the intentional destruction or disablement of all transportation modes. 
Transportation Security Imposes security oversight and regulation in aviation, highway, mass transit, 
Administration (TSA) passenger and freight rail, pipeline and maritime where it shares oversight with the 
U.S. Coast Guard (www.tsa.gov). 
Federal Emergency Coordinates the response to a disaster that has occurred in the  and 
Management Agency that overwhelms the resources of local and state authorities, and supports planning 
(FEMA) to reduce vulnerabilities (www.fema.gov). 
Oversees safety and security of national waterways, including commercial freight 
 Coast Guard and passenger service, and public transportation such as municipal ferry service, 
(USCG) boaters, and kayakers (www.uscg.mil). 
Provides support in the emergency operation and restoration of inland waterways, 
 Corp of ports, and harbors under the supervision of DOD/USACE, including dredging 
Engineers (USACE) operations and assists in restoring the transportation infrastructure 
(www.usace.army.mil). 
 Protects human health and the environment by writing and enforcing regulations 
Environmental Protection based on laws passed by Congress (www.epa.gov).  
Agency (EPA) 
Identifies and evaluates safety risks, develops and enforces standards for 
Pipeline and Hazardous transporting hazardous materials and for the design, construction, operation, and 
Materials Administration maintenance of pipelines carrying natural gas or hazardous liquids. 
(PHMSA) (www.phmsa.dot.gov). 
Oversees the transmission and wholesale of electricity and natural gas in interstate 
Federal Energy Regulatory commerce and regulates the transportation of oil by pipeline in interstate commerce 
Commission (FERC) (www.ferc.gov). 
109 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Pipelines. The nations pipeline safety programs are overseen by Congress and administered by PHMSA. 
However, PHMSA delegates the majority of these responsibilities for intrastate (generally the gathering 
and distribution pipelines) lines to the states. PHMSA retains the role as primary safety inspector for 
interstate pipelines (generally, the transmission pipelines), except in 11 states (Arizona, California, 
Connecticut, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Washington, Virginia and West Virginia). 
State pipeline safety personnel represent more than 75 % of the state/federal inspection workforce, 
although state employees account for less than 40 % of the federal pipeline safety budget. This means that 
the bulk of the safety and inspection responsibility lies at the state level. Under existing law, states opt 
into this relationship with PHMSA. If a state decides not to participate, PHMSA does the safety 
inspection on its own. At present, this applies only to Alaska and Hawaii.  
All state programs must certify to DOT that they will adopt regulations that are as stringent as the Federal 
Pipeline Safety Regulations. States are allowed to adopt pipeline safety regulations that are stricter than 
federal government regulations and the overwhelming majority of states do have more stringent 
requirements. State regulations were developed over the years based on specific results of state 
inspections, changing public priorities, and increased safety expectations of the local public. A 2013 
report issued by the National Association of Pipeline Safety Representatives (NAPSR), with assistance 
and support from the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners (NARUC), found that 
most states have adopted pipeline safety regulations more stringent than the federal regulations. The 
report also contains a compendium of state regulations and identifies those that exceed federal 
requirements. [NAPSR 2013].  
PHMSA has separate safety and design standards for natural gas and liquids pipelines (49 CFR Part 192 
for natural gas and 49 CFR Part 195 for liquids). The regulations also provide guidance for proper 
management and operation of these pipelines. 
13.5. Standards and Codes 
Codes and standards are used by the transportation industry to establish minimum acceptable criteria for 
design and construction. Although adoption of codes is important, enforcement is a key factor in ensuring 
compliance of the built environment with codes and standards. The following sections discuss some of 
the standards and codes for each transportation system:  
Transportation Facilities. Stations, terminals, maintenance facilities, substations, cargo storage facilities, 
and other buildings supporting the transportation system are governed by adopted state and local building 
codes, which are often based on model codes. Many cities and states are adopting international model 
building codes. More information on codes and applicable standards is found in Chapter 12 (Buildings).  
Roads, Bridges, Highways and Road Tunnels. AASHTO is a standards-setting body that publishes 
specifications, test protocols, and guidelines used in highway and bridge design and construction 
throughout the . AASHTO specifications for the design of bridges consider waterfront 
effects, since bridges often span waterways. Hence, the provisions of these specifications are often used in 
the design of similar waterfront structures.  
Rail. The American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association (AREMA) authors a 
Manual for Railway Engineering (MRE) [AREMA 2015a], and a Communications and Signals Manual, 
among other guides. The MRE is updated annually with new design standards for fixed railway.  
Air. For airports, FAA can accept state standards for construction materials and methods. Under certain 
conditions, the use of state dimensional standards that differ from the standards in FAA Advisory 
Circulars are acceptable for federally obligated or certificated airports. 
Many communities have zoning ordinances, building codes, and fire regulations that may place additional 
requirements on airport development and operations. For example, if a new hangar or other structure is to 
110 
I  
Transportation Systems  
be built at an existing airport, approval and/or permits must be received from the local building 
department or planning authority. For example, the Borough of Lincoln Park, New Jersey has strict storm 
water management requirements due to high flood hazard potential. 
The FAA issues advisories that govern engineering, design, and construction standards for various 
airport-related equipment, facilities, and structures. Their Series 150 AC Library has a complete listing of 
current advisory circulars. If a project is funded wholly or partly through FAA, it will comply with these 
standards. 
ACs cover standards for general airport design, specifying construction, design and installation of visual 
aids, drainage design, approach path systems, runway and taxiway pavement and lighting design, and 
planning and design guidelines for airport terminals and facilities. ACs define design criteria for most 
details of an airports facilities, including terminal buildings, lighting, and navigational aids. These 
documents define standard criteria for design and construction, but do not specifically address extreme 
weather events beyond drainage construction for a 50-year storm.  
Ports, Harbors, and Waterways. In the purpose and need statement for a proposed project, the basis of 
design should state the standards and codes used, and the regulations and guidelines that apply to the 
project. Organizations that provide codes, standards, and guidelines commonly used in maritime 
infrastructure design and construction include: 
x American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHTO) 
x Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress (PIANC) 
x American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) 
x American Concrete Institute (ACI) 
x U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) 
x U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) 
x American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC) 
x British Standards Institution (BSI) 
x International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
x Overseas Coastal Area Development Institute of Japan (OCDI) 
The American Society of Civil Engineers, ASCE, maintains ASCE 61 [2014a] Seismic Design Standard 
for Piers and Wharves, which defines a displacement-based design method to establish guidelines for 
piers and wharves to withstand the effects of earthquakes [Meng and Qu 2010]. 
Many organizations have guidance documents based on industry expertise to supplement codes and 
standards and to support designers. 
The American Concrete Institute (ACI) developed and maintains ACI 357.3R [2014] Guide for Design 
and Construction of Waterfront and Coastal Concrete Marine Structures. This guide addresses the 
durability and serviceability of concrete waterfront structures, as well as analysis techniques and design 
methodologies. 
The World Association for Waterborne Transport Infrastructure [PIANC 2012] provides expert guidance, 
recommendations and technical advice for design, development, and maintenance of ports, waterways and 
coastal areas. Two guidelines of frequent interest in port design are: Seismic Design Guidelines for Port 
Structures [International Navigation Association 2002b] and Guidelines for the Design of Fender Systems 
[International Navigation Association 2002a]. 
111 
I  
Transportation Systems  
The DoD initiated the Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC) program to unify all technical criteria and 
standards pertaining to planning, design, and construction of facilities, which were previously issued by 
individual Defense agencies [NIBS 2015]. They cover military harbors, coastal facilities, waterfront 
construction, and design of piers, wharves, berthing and mooring facilities.  
The USACE published an extensive library of Engineering Manuals [USACE 2015] covering the design 
of a variety of major civil works along waterways and coastal environments. The manuals, typically used 
for waterfront design, cover flood walls, navigation locks, cofferdams, and coastal design and engineering 
of revetments, seawalls and bulkheads  none of which specifically incorporate adaptation policies that 
support resilience [NYC DOT 2015].  
BSI standards for waterfront construction, BSI 6349, Maritime Structures [BSI 2013], cover general 
criteria, materials, design of quay walls, jetties, dolphins, shipyards and sea locks. They also include a 
code of practice for the design of fendering and mooring systems, and design of roll-off and roll-on 
ramps, linkspans and walkways. 
Pipelines. PHMSA employees participate in more than 25 national voluntary consensus standards-setting 
organizations that address pipeline design, construction, maintenance, inspection, and repair. PHMSA 
then reviews and approves standards for incorporation by reference into its regulations. PHMSA currently 
incorporates by reference all or parts of more than 60 voluntary standards and specifications developed 
and published by technical organizations, including consensus engineering standards from the American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), the American Petroleum Institute (API), the American Gas 
Association, the National Fire Protection Association, and the American Society for Testing and 
Materials (ASTM) International. For example, ASME Standard B31.8S establishes risk assessment 
practices for identifying pipelines (primarily older pipelines) that could possibly be susceptible to material 
and construction-related integrity concerns. In addition, many agencies  federal, state and local  share 
responsibility for developing and enforcing other codes and standards applicable to pipeline 
infrastructure, such as erosion control requirements, noise ordinances, and building codes. 
13.5.1. New Construction 
Current federal and state project development guidelines require an environmental study at the early 
stages of transportation projects to identify potential environmental impacts and state/federal permitting 
requirements. The study must provide a sufficient level of understanding of the projected routing and 
locations to enable engineers and planners to identify likely impacts.  
If federal funding is used for the project, it will be subject to environmental review under the National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) [EPA 2008]. Projects go through a scoping process to establish 
general parameters of the work and the potential for impact. The scoping process leads to a Class of 
Action determination establishing whether the project is Categorically Exempt from NEPA review, or 
will need either an Environmental Assessment (EA) or the highest level of review, which is an 
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). An EIS requires local community input and is an important 
opportunity for the community to discuss the alignment of their resilience goals and those of the project. 
With the exception of highways that are owned by either toll authorities or by public private partnerships 
and pipelines that are owned by private industry, major new transportation projects in a community will 
generally have a large portion (more than 50 %) that is federally funded by agencies such as the FAA, 
FTA, FHWA, or USCG. While the majority of new freight rail construction projects are privately funded, 
FRA supports passenger and freight railroading through a variety of grant and loan programs to improve 
safety, relieve congestion, and encourage the expansion and upgrade of passenger and freight rail 
infrastructure and services. The U.S. DOT publishes codes, standards and guidelines, such as FAA 
advisory circulars, and works in close collaboration with organizations like AASHTO and AREMA, 
shown in Table 13-7 and Table 13-8. 
112 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Table 13-7: Surface transport codes, standards, or guidelines 
Component Organization Codes, Standards or Guideline 
General AASHTO Road Design Guide, 4th Edition [AASHTO 2011b] 
A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 6th Edition 
[AASHTO 2011a] 
General AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications, 7th Edition [AASHTO 2014] 
AASHTO Highway Drainage Guidelines [AASHTO 2014] 
AASHTO Guide for Design of Pavement Structures, 4th Edition [AASHTO 
1998] 
Design Standards Interstate System 
A Policy on Design Standards  Interstate Systems, January 2005 
FHWA Highways in the Coastal Environment, 2nd Edition [FHWA 2008] 
Highways in the Coastal Environment: Assessing Extreme Events, HEC-
25, Volume 2 [Douglas et al. 2014] 
Specific to AASHTO Guide Specifications for Bridges Vulnerable to Coastal Storms [AASHTO 
Severe 2008] 
Weather/ 
Hazards Transportation Asset Management Guide [AASHTO 2013] 
Integrating Extreme Weather Risk into Transportation Asset Management 
[xxxx] 
NCHRP Climate Change, Extreme Weather Events, and the Highway System 
[NCHRP 2014] 
FHWA Impacts of Climate Change and Variability on Transportation Systems and 
Infrastructure, The Gulf Coast Study, Phase 2, Task 3.2 [FHWA 2014] 
FHWA Order 5520: Transportation System Preparedness and Resilience to 
Climate Change and Extreme Weather Events [FHWA 2014] 
 DOT 2014 DOT Climate Adaptation Plan [USDOT 2014] 
U.S. Global Change National Climate Assessment [US Global Change Research Program 2014] 
Research Program 
113 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Table 13-8: Rail surface transport codes, standards, or guidelines 
Component Organization Codes, Standards or Guideline 
Manual for Railway Engineering [AREMA 2015a] 
Communications and Signals (C&S) Manual 
General AREMA 
[AREMA 2014] 
Portfolio of Track Work Plans [AREMA 2014] 
Practical Guide to Railway Engineering [AREMA 
2003] 
General AREMA Bridge Inspection Handbook [AREMA 2015b] 
Design of Modern Steel Railway Bridges, First 
Edition [Unsworth 2010] 
AREMA None identified 
AAR None identified 
Specific to 
Natural Hazard 
Mitigation  DOT 2014 DOT Climate Adaptation Plan [USDOT 2014] 
National Climate Assessment [US Global Change 
U.S. Global Change Research Program 
Research Program 2014] 
Roads, Bridges, Highways and Road Tunnels. The interstate system with roads, bridges, highways, and 
road tunnels, and virtually all other state and local roadways and bridges in the U.S. are owned and 
operated by the public sector. Toll roads are typically owned and operated by public/private partnerships, 
but are subject to the same federal and state design standards issued primarily by FHWA and state 
Departments of Transportation (DOT). State DOTs establish standards within the framework of 
AASHTO specifications and standards. AASHTOs most recent bridge design manual, the Load Factor 
and Resistance Design (LFRD) Bridge Design Specifications [AASHTO 2012], incorporates a risk factor 
into load bearing calculations to address effects due to deflection, cracking, fatigue, flexure, shear, 
torsion, buckling, settlement, bearing, and sliding.  
After Hurricanes Ivan and Katrina, FHWA began recommending that design of major interstate structures 
in coastal regions consider a combination of wave and surge effects, as well as other site specific risks 
from coastal flood events. Additionally, FHWA also suggested that a flood frequency surge and wave 
action (500-year storm) may be appropriate to consider in some cases [Meyer et al. 2014]. Some of the 
codes, standards, and guidelines for surface transportation are shown in Table 13-8.  
Rail. The freight rail network in the  is primarily owned and operated by the private sector. 
This network consists of national freight railroads and short line railroads that connect national lines to 
local industrial areas. Amtrak (National Railroad Passenger Corporation) primarily owns the national 
passenger rail network and hosts regional commuter rail lines in some areas, such as the Northeast 
Corridor. Many regional commuter lines (under public authorities) have their own large rail networks. 
There are many sections of rail lines where freight trains, Amtrak, and even commuter rail lines share 
tracks. In the railroad industry, AREMA establishes and updates design standards for track, structures, 
and facilities. Operating standards in the rail industry pertaining to safety are under the jurisdiction of 
114 
I  
Transportation Systems  
FRA. Additionally, the industry trade organization, Association of American Railways (AAR), has a role 
in the development of operating standards and policies pertaining to railroad operations. Some codes, 
standards, and guidelines for rail are listed in Table 13-8. 
Ports. New maritime construction needs to follow the local codes and standards for design and 
construction. Natural hazard impacts are usually incorporated by local authorities by utilizing the 
guidance documents issued by various local and federal authorities, such as USACE and IPCC. For 
example, the City of New York adopted specific guidelines in regards to the effects of natural hazards 
through an authorized panel, New York Panel on Climate Change [2010].  
Pipelines. New pipelines are subject to current federal and state design and safety guidelines. Liquids 
pipelines and intrastate natural gas pipelines are regulated at the state level; therefore, regulations and risk 
evaluations for assessment of hazards will vary depending on location.  
13.5.1.1. Design Hazard Levels 
National codes do not specify hazard levels for all hazards or situations, but many provide guidance on 
how they should be developed for such circumstances. Some hazards, such as flood elevations and wave 
conditions, need to be evaluated locally, as they depend on local topography and soil conditions. For 
example, rail codes stipulate various flood levels for which a structure may need to be designed, as a 50 
or 100-year flood event. Similarly for wave loads, various codes (e.g., USACE Coastal Engineering 
Manual [USACE 2002]) advise that waves should be considered, but a design professional needs to 
determine appropriate local wave characteristics. Similarly, the FHWA lists three approaches for 
determining site-specific design water levels in Highways in the Coastal Environment [FHWA 2008]. 
These include use of available analyses, historical data, and numerical simulations with historic inputs, or 
some combination of these approaches. These are general guidelines, but they apply to all regions of the 
country and ensure the process is data driven. 
When describing Drainage Channels, the AASHTO Road Design Guide [AASHTO 2011b] states that 
channels should be designed to carry the design runoff and to accommodate excessive storm water with 
minimal highway flooding or damage. No specific hazard levels are mentioned, leaving hazard 
specification up to state regulations and engineering judgment. AREMA provides more specific 
requirements than AASHTO in regards to hazard levels, but still leaves room for site-specific decisions. 
To continue the drainage example, the Manual for Railway Engineering [AREMA 2015a] states that the 
100-year base flood elevation is the most commonly regulated storm water elevation associated with 
rivers, streams and concentrated flow areas. It goes on to describe how, any change to the flood plain 
will generally result in extensive studies and computer modeling to be submitted for approval. Again, 
these regulations are not quantitative regulations, but a guidance that ensures proper steps are taken by the 
appropriate agency to mitigate risk. 
State and local legislative bodies are not obligated to adopt model building codes and may write their own 
code or portions of a code. For example, New York City Building code describes the requirement for 
flood-resistant construction, referencing FEMA flood maps and ASCE 24 [2014c] for dry flood-
proofing. The Design Flood Elevation for certain structures, such as terminals, air traffic control towers, 
and electrical substations, is the 100-year floodplain plus one-foot of freeboard, or additional foot of 
elevation above the floodplain level.  
The National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) conducted a study on natural hazard 
adaptation strategies in 2013 and provided some specific examples of dealing with increasing severity of 
weather events. For example, precipitation event modeling may be improved by using climate-dependent 
input parameters, or using relative increases in precipitation amounts following the Clausius-Clapeyron 
relationship [Meyer et al. 2014].  
115 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Interstate natural gas infrastructure is regulated by FERC, which is responsible for compliance with 
NEPA. The NEPA document addresses potential impacts resulting from the project and natural hazard 
impacts on the project. As stated previously, impacts on pipelines are generally limited because they are 
buried, but aboveground facilities such as compressor stations could be affected by storm-related 
incidents. Input from state and local governments is a key component of the review process at FERC. 
Local knowledge of environmental conditions and concerns about inter-relationships with other critical 
infrastructure should be identified to FERC at the earliest point in any project review. For example, there 
may be resiliency and reliability concerns if a new pipelines proposed route would be adjacent to a 
critical electric transmission line. 
13.5.1.2. Recovery Levels 
For roadway and rail transportation, no specific criteria for recovery levels are identified in codes or 
standards. However, at state and local levels there may be operational or performance goals with regards 
to recovery of function. 
There is minimal description of required recovery levels for airports. Language for storm water drainage 
requires surface runoff from a design storm be disposed of without damage to facilities, undue saturation 
of the subsoil, or significant interruption of normal traffic. The drainage system will have the maximum 
reliability of operation practicable under all conditions, with due consideration given to abnormal 
requirements, such as debris and annual periods of snowmelt and ice jam breakup. 
Marine infrastructure is critical to the transportation industry (commercial, public, and private) and the 
full recovery will be necessary for proper functionality. However, no specific guidance was identified.  
13.5.2. Existing Construction 
A model code does not have legal standing until it is adopted as law by a legislative body (state 
legislature, county board, city council, etc.). Because codes are updated regularly, existing structures and 
infrastructure systems are traditionally required to only meet the code that was enforced at the time of 
design and construction unless it undergoes significant reconstruction, rehabilitation, alteration, or if the 
occupancy of an existing building changes. In such case, provisions are often included in adopted codes to 
require partial to full compliance [ASCE 2014b]. 
Existing transportation systems are similarly bound by the codes and standards for which they were 
initially designed. Typically, transportation infrastructure is not required to be upgraded as new codes are 
adopted. However, AASHTO and the FHWA have seismic retrofit standards for existing bridges and 
transportation infrastructure systems. Thresholds for enforcement are established by each state DOT or 
local jurisdiction to determine if a rehabilitation project should require a full seismic upgrade of the 
existing structures to the current codes and standards. For example, in New York and New Jersey, bridge 
structures that undergo rehabilitation generally require a full seismic upgrade if the project includes a 
replacement of the concrete bridge deck slab. 
There are similar policies in place for transportation facility buildings such as stations, terminals, and 
maintenance facilities. Most building codes require full seismic compliance for building renovation 
projects if the value of the project improvement is equal to or greater than a threshold percentage of the 
buildings replacement value (usually 50 %). 
Airport codes and standards do not address retrofit of existing construction. Several advisory circulars 
outline procedures for maintaining existing facilities: 
x AC 150/5380-6C, Guidelines and Procedures for Maintenance of Airport Pavements [FAA 2010] 
x AC 150/5380-7B, Airport Pavement Management Program (PMP [FAA 2014a]) 
116 
I  
Transportation Systems  
x AC 150/5340-26C, Maintenance of Airport Visual Aid Facilities [FAA 2014b] 
x AC 150/5200-33, Hazardous Wildlife Attractants on or Near Airports [FAA 2007] 
For rail, roadway, and maritime systems, codes and standards that specifically address evaluation or 
improvements to existing construction have not been identified. 
Figure 13-10 compares the time frame of transportation projects and expected service periods against the 
possible future climate impacts, such as drought or sea level rise. According to Moritz et al. [2012], 
infrastructure planned and built with current design criteria may not be adequate for future operation and 
resilience. Hence, communities should consider the desired functions and environmental conditions that 
may be needed over the service life during transportation planning process. 
 
Figure 13-10: Timeframes for transportation systems functionality and potential climate change 
impacts [Source: Michael Savonis, FHWA 2009] 
13.6. Strategies for Implementing Plans for Community Resilience 
13.6.1. Available Guidance 
Section 13.2 describes the various components of the transportation systems and case studies of where 
these systems may have failed in the past. The performance of transportation systems depends on the age 
of the system, the type and intensity of natural hazard, the codes and standards to which it was designed, 
maintenance levels, and operational decisions made immediately before and after the hazard event.  
Current engineering standards and guidelines provide tools to assess the performance of bridges and 
roadways, such as the Manual for Bridge Evaluation [AASHTO 2010]. Similar standards exist for other 
transportation system components, such as airports, rail, subways, etc.  
AASHTOs Transportation Asset Management Guide [AASHTO 2011c] applies to both roads and rail 
systems, as it encourages agencies to include life-cycle planning, operations, and maintenance into state 
and local resource management programs. The guide recommends processes and tools for life cycle 
management, incorporating effects due to weather events, and monitoring the assets to continually 
improve performance forecasting.  
The Greater Toronto Airports Authority (GTAA) uses the PIEVC (Public Infrastructure Engineering 
Vulnerability Committee) Protocol from Engineers Canada to assess risk and identify preliminary needs 
(such as storm water facilities). 
117 
I  
Transportation Systems  
AC 150/5200-31C [FAA 2009], Airport Emergency Plan, provides guidance on conducting a hazard risk 
analysis to help determine what hazards exist and how to address them. In addition, the FAA Airport 
Sustainable Master Plan Pilot Program includes a baseline inventory or assessment of each defined 
sustainability category (which will vary by airport), establishment of measurable goals, and development 
of specific sustainability initiatives to help the airport achieve each goal. This approach could be adopted 
for evaluating resilience of the airport facility. 
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 31000:2009, Risk management  Principles and 
guidelines [ISO 2009], provides principles, a framework, and a process for managing risk. It can be used 
by any organization regardless of size, activity, or sector. Using ISO 31000 can help organizations 
increase the likelihood of achieving objectives, improve identification of opportunities and threats, and 
effectively allocate and use resources for risk treatment. ISO 31000 cannot be used for certification 
purposes, but does provide guidance for internal or external audit programs. Organizations using it can 
compare their risk management practices with an internationally-recognized benchmark, providing sound 
principles for effective management and corporate governance. The guidelines for establishing sound risk 
assessment programs can be applied to the development of resilience assessment and mitigation plans 
[ISO 2009]. 
13.6.2. Solutions for Future Construction 
Resiliency for future construction should be addressed in the project planning phase. Appropriate site 
selection, alignment, and grade level can greatly improve community resilience. For new surface 
transportation projects, placing roadways, tracks and tunnel portals at a naturally high grade, locating 
bridge foundations outside of a waterway and avoiding roadways with unstable side slopes are options 
that should be preferred when they are available. Likewise for airports near bodies of water and seaports, 
higher finished grade levels and avoiding locations with unstable soils during earthquakes is fundamental. 
Rail. When the Port Authority of New York 
and New Jersey (PANYNJ) planned their 
Airtrain JFK project, a light rail system for 
JFK International Airport, they decided that 
given the investment, they required that the 
system could be readily restored to service 
after the occurrence of a seismic event. This 
performance goal supports its critical role in 
airport access. The presence of liquefiable 
soils in a seismic event led to this decision to 
exceed the code required seismic design 
criteria in AASHTO and AREMA. The 
consortium that designed and constructed the 
project provided seismic isolation bearings at  
all the elevated guideway pier columns to Figure 13-11: Airtrain seismic isolation bearing 
achieve the performance goal (Figure 13-11). 
The system began operation in 2003 [Englot 
and Bakas 2002].  
The FTA advocates for designs that include larger drainage capacity, stronger structures to withstand 
winds, and materials suited for higher temperatures. Potential solutions for subways include requiring 
flood gates, high elevation entrances, and closable ventilation grates (requiring new fan-driven 
ventilation). A FEMA-commissioned study determined that flood protection savings are, on average, four 
times greater than prevention costs. 
118 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Localized flooding for transit and other transportation facilities can be prevented by establishing proper 
stormwater management. Best practices include rain gardens, stormwater ponds, increased vegetation, 
green roofs, rain barrels, and pervious pavements. These solutions allow stormwater to be absorbed 
through natural processes, reducing, or preventing flooding altogether [FTA 2013].  
Transportation Facilities. PANYNJ has Sustainable Infrastructure Guidelines that are implemented for 
projects such as terminal building construction, building demolition, electronics systems, communications 
systems, airfield construction or rehabilitation, and landscaping [PANYNJ 2011]. The guidelines require 
the protection of the ecological health of wetlands, floodplains, and riparian buffers, protection and 
maintenance of absorbent landscapes, mitigation of the heat island effect, and implementation of storm 
water best management practice, implementation of sustainable landscape maintenance. LAWAs 
Sustainable Airport Planning, Design, and Construction Guidelines are similar, identifying many 
technical approaches to natural hazard adaptation planning such as increasing the capacity of storm water 
conveyance and storage (e.g., design for 100-year and 500-year storms) and using heat-resistant paving 
materials. 
New buildings and infrastructure systems, particularly those adjacent to coastal resources or within a 
floodplain, should implement flood hazard mitigation as part of the design. PANYNJ established a 
requirement for additional elevation of 457 mm (18 inches) higher than the current code requirement for 
flood elevations, based on an anticipated increase of the mean sea level. If the requirement is not feasible, 
then it could perhaps be met for all critical project elements (electrical equipment, communications, etc.). 
San Diego International Airport incorporated low impact solutions (e.g., pervious pavement, infiltration 
storage chambers, bio-retention swales, modular wetlands, riprap energy dissipater) into their north side 
improvements to reduce flooding risks.  
The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) issued a series of policy statements [ASCE 2015] 
supporting resilient and sustainable reconstruction of areas devastated by hazard events. ASCE 
specifically supports the following actions: 
x Redesign and reconstruction of hazard protection systems for affected communities at a level 
appropriate for protection of the population, critical infrastructure and the environment; and 
x Reconstruction that incorporates appropriate studies, urban design, application of technology, 
land use, zoning, and utilization of natural systems to recreate communities that are resilient, 
sustainable, more livable and less vulnerable to accidental, intentional and/or natural hazard 
events. 
The challenges include evaluation of the prior conditions and effects caused by the hazard(s) to determine 
if reconstruction of the affected infrastructure is viable, feasible and beneficial to facilitate the task of 
protecting life, property, and national critical infrastructure. 
To better protect lives, property, and infrastructure systems, the affected areas cannot always be rebuilt to 
match prior conditions. Reconstruction and recovery includes considering the existing conditions, that 
may have facilitated the destruction. It also includes considering the principles of resilience and 
sustainability. 
The Transportation Research Board (TRB) serves the research and practice needs of the U.S. 
transportation systems. TRB has members from the U.S. DOT, state DOTs, practicing transportation 
professionals, and transportation experts. Committee TRB ABE40: Committee on Critical Transportation 
Infrastructure Protection [TRB 2015a] considers threats and hazards to transportation infrastructure. This 
includes terrorist threats and large-scale or complex and catastrophic hazards. The committee that deals 
with extreme weather events is TRB A0020T: Special Task Force on Climate Change and Energy [TRB 
2015b].  
119 
I  
Transportation Systems  
13.6.3. Solutions for Existing Construction 
The role of a transportation system within a community determines when its function needs to be restored 
following a hazard event. Evaluation criteria should include vulnerability of existing systems and the 
direct and indirect costs a community will incur with partial or full loss until it is repaired, replaced, or 
recovered, and service is restored after a hazard event.  
An evaluation of existing transportation systems to prevailing hazards can be used to determine the most 
critical and vulnerable systems and components. In the 1980s, most state DOTs in earthquake prone 
regions in the U.S. went through a similar process with FHWA guidance for determining priorities for 
retrofitting the highway bridges in the state for seismic vulnerabilities.  
Consideration of the transportation system role in community resilience and an assessment of gaps in 
desired transportation performance following a hazard event are needed before solutions can be 
developed. A prioritized list of transportation needs and solutions will support a comprehensive 
community resilience strategy. After determining the criticality and vulnerability of the transportation 
systems in a community, mitigation projects can be identified to reduce the recovery period and increase 
resilience in a cost effective manner. To rank the value of each project investment, a cost-benefit analysis 
can be used to prioritize the projects for planning purposes.  
A study conducted by the State of New Jersey DOT [Englot 2011] evaluated the vulnerability of its 
transportation systems. It involved prioritizing all 6,600 bridges and tunnels in the state of New Jersey for 
roads, passenger rail, transit lines, and freight rail lines. The agency identified their top 50 most critical 
and vulnerable state owned bridges and established potential vulnerability mitigation projects that reduced 
the recovery period and user costs. They put the mitigation projects into a long-term plan that included a 
rehabilitation project for each of these bridges. They have been following that plan since 2010. 
User costs were developed by assuming that the loss of a bridge will lead to a longer detour, usually at 
slower speeds. The increase in daily travel time due to the detour, multiplied by the number of days until 
the bridge is functional and open, times the number of travelers that are detoured daily, results in a total 
traveler time delay. When multiplied by the travelers value of time ($/hr) it equals the monetary cost of 
the recovery period. Table 13-9 shows ratios of value of time that were used in the study for various 
modes or travel for goods and people. The $30 per hour value was taken from a reference (rounded from 
$29.82) and is in 2012 dollars [Farokhi et al. 2015]. 
Table 13-9: Multimodal Value of Time Units (VOTU) for calculating cost of delay [Farokhi et al. 
2015; Englot 2011] 
Travel Mode Unit VOTU Value ($/hr.) Travel Mode Unit VOTU Value ($/hr.) 
1 Passenger 1 $30 1 passenger train (10 cars) 700 $21,000 
1 Auto (avg. 1.2 passengers) 1.2 $36 1 subway train (8 cars) 1,120 $33,600 
1 truck w cargo & driver 2.4 $72 1 rail hopper car 9.6 $288 
1 Bus (45 passengers) 45 $1,350 1 cargo container 2.4 $72 
User costs due to partial or full loss of transportation assets are well documented in the literature since 
they are routinely calculated to determine the impacts of transportation construction projects on a 
community (lane closures, bridge closures, etc.). These user costs may also be used to reflect the 
inconvenience to the community and its social institutions of unavailable transportation methods and 
120 
I  
Transportation Systems  
delays in travel when forced to take alternate means of transportation. However, such indirect costs are 
not well documented. Most state DOTs have a manual for determining user costs due to highway 
construction.  
The same type of calculation can be used to determine user costs for the recovery period of a subway 
tunnel, an airport closure, or a container port facility. This simplified methodology yields costs in dollars 
that can be easily understood by the community to measure the value of a strategy to improve resilience 
(reduce the time to recovery of function) of any transportation asset. 
Additional Solutions. Sea level rise strategies may need to be applied to existing buildings as well as new 
building projects for many coastal transportation systems. For example, Key West International Airport in 
Florida is vulnerable to hurricanes and sea level rise. They have been retrofitting existing infrastructure by 
installing flapper valves inside drainage structures to avoid standing water on runways and taxiways. In 
addition, they have adapted their wildlife hazard mitigation strategies to handle new animals that are 
encroaching on the airport as a result of changing habitat. Additional solutions are outlined in the Monroe 
County Climate Action Plan [Monroe County Climate Change Advisory Committee 2013].  
USACE employs a 3-tier process for screening projects that need to address sea level rise [Moritz 2012]. 
Tier 1 establishes a Strategic Decision Context, Tier 2 involves Project Area Vulnerability and Tier 3 
evaluates Alternative Development, Evaluation, and Adaptability. As sea levels rise, both the frequency 
of flooding and associated loads on structural may increase. Structural loads may need to consider: 
x Increased variability of load factors 
x Tidal and wave height range 
x Local sea level change rate 
x Frequency of events 
x Key project processes 
x Short and long-term erosion and land recession 
x Cumulative impacts with other natural drivers 
The FTA identifies four strategies for adaptation that are broad enough that they apply to a range of 
transportation facilities [FTA 2013]: 
x Maintain and manage  adjust budgets for increased maintenance cost and improve severe event 
response times. Utilize technologies that detect changes such as pressure and temperature in 
materials as a precaution against structure damage or rising water levels.  
x Strengthen and protect  existing infrastructure should be retrofitted to withstand future weather 
conditions. Ensure facilities can stand up against high winds and extreme temperatures, and 
assure flood prevention and adequate drainage.  
x Enhance redundancy  identify system alternatives in the event of service interruption and 
develop a regional mobility perspective that includes all transportation modes.  
x Retreat  Abandon at risk infrastructure located in vulnerable or indefensible areas. Potentially 
relocate in a less vulnerable location.  
For subways, many solutions have been implemented to address rain events that may otherwise result in 
tunnel flooding, such as increasing the number of pumps or pump capacity. New York City implemented 
raised ventilation grates to prevent runoff into subway lines. Tokyo ventilation shafts are designed to 
close when a heavy rain warning is issued, and can be closed by remote control or automatically in 
121 
I  
Transportation Systems  
response to a flood sensor. The PANYNJ raised floodgates at station platforms to account for sea level 
rise and sealed all gates below the 100-year floodplain.  
For open railways, track buckling results from increased temperatures and are costly as well as a safety 
hazard. Slow orders (mandated speed reductions) are typically issued on sections of track in areas where 
an elevated rail temperature is expected and risk of track buckling is increased. Replacement track has a 
higher lateral resistance to combat buckling forces. FRA has created a model for predicting rail 
temperatures, allowing proper replacement before an incident occurs [FRA 2014]. 
13.7. References 
Airport Cooperative Research Program (ACRP 2012) ACRP Synthesis 33: Airport Climate Adaptation 
and Resilience  A Synthesis of Airport Practice, Sponsored by the Federal Aviation Administration, 
Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, DC, 
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/acrp/acrp_syn_033.pdf. 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO 1998) AASHTO Guide 
for Design of Pavement Structures, Fourth Edition (with Supplement), American Association of State 
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), Washington, DC. 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO 2008) Guide 
Specifications for Bridges Vulnerable to Coastal Storms, American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials (AASHTO), Washington, DC. 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO 2010) Manual for 
Bridge Evaluation, Second Edition, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
(AASHTO), Washington, DC. 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO 2011a) A Policy on 
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, Sixth Edition, American Association of State Highway and 
Transportation Officials (AASHTO), Washington, DC. 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO 2011b) AASHTO Road 
Design Guide, Fourth Edition, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
(AASHTO), Washington, DC. 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO 2011c) AASHTO 
Transportation Asset Management Guide: A Focus on Implementation, First Edition, American 
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, Washington, DC. 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO 2012) AASHTO LRFD 
Bridge Design Specifications, Sixth Edition, American Association of State Highway and Transportation 
Officials (AASHTO), Washington, DC. 
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO 2013) AASHTO 
Transportation Asset Management Guide: A Focus on Implementation, FHWA-HIF-10-023, American 
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) and Transportation Research 
Board (TRB), Washington, DC.  
American Concrete Institute (ACI 2014) ACI 357.3R-14: Guide for Design and Construction of 
Waterfront and Coastal Concrete Marine Structures, American Concrete Institute (ACI), Farmington 
Hills, MI. 
122 
I  
Transportation Systems  
American Lifelines Alliance (ALA 2005) Draft Guideline for Assessing the Performance of Oil and 
Natural Gas Pipeline Systems in Natural Hazard and Human Threat Events, American Lifelines 
Alliance(ALA), Washington, DC, 
http://www.americanlifelinesalliance.com/pdf/PipeguideFinalPosted061705.pdf. 
American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association (AREMA 2015a) Manual for 
Railway Engineering, American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association AREMA), 
Lanham, MD. 
American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association (AREMA 2015b) Bridge 
Inspection Handbook, American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association AREMA), 
Lanham, MD. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2013) 2013 Report Card for America's Infrastructure, 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), Reston, VA, http://www.infrastructurereportcard.org/. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2014a) ASCE 61-14: Seismic Design Standards for Piers 
and Wharves, Standards Committee on Seismic Design of Piers and Wharves of the Coasts, Oceans, 
Ports, and Rivers Institute, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), Reston, VA. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2014b) ASCE Policy Statement 525: Model Building Codes, 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), http://www.asce.org/issues-and-advocacy/public-
policy/policy-statement-525---model-building-codes/. Viewed: April 18, 2015.  
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2014c) ASCE 24: Flood Resistant Design and Construction, 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural Engineering Institute (SEI), Reston, VA.  
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2015) Public Policy Statements, American Society of Civil 
Engineers (ASCE), http://www.asce.org/public_policy_statements/. Viewed April 24, 2015. 
Association of Oil Pipe Lines (AOPL 2014) U.S. Liquids Pipeline Usage & Mileage Report, Association 
of Oil Pipe Lines (AOPL) and American Petroleum Institute (API), Washington, DC.  
Ballantyne, D. (2008) The ShakeOut Scenario, Supplemental Study: Oil and Gas Pipelines, USGS 
Circular 1324; California Geological Survey Special Report 207, version 1.0, 
http://www.colorado.edu/hazards/shakeout/pipelines.pdf. Viewed October 1, 2014. 
British Standards Institute (BSI 2013) Maritime works: Part 1-4: General  Code of practice for 
materials, BS 6349-1-4:2013, British Standards Institute (BSI), February 28. 
Cities21 (2015), Cities21, http://www.cities21.org/cms/. Viewed July 22, 2015. 
DeBlasio, A.J.; T.J. Regan; M.E. Zirker; K. Lovejoy; and K. Fichter (2004) Learning from the 2003 
Blackout, Public Roads,  Department of Transportation (DOT) Federal Highway 
Administration (FHA), https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/publicroads/04sep/04.cfm Viewed 
October 14, 2014.  
Det Norske Veritas (DNV 2007) Pipeline Damage Assessment from Hurricane Katrina and Rita in the 
Gulf of Mexico, Report No. 448 14182, Revision No. 1, Prepared for the Minerals Management Service, 
January 22.  
Dolak, Kevin (2011) Irene: Flooding Cuts off Towns in Vermont, New York, ABC News, August 29, 
http://abcnews.go.com/US/hurricanes/hurricane-irene-flooding-cuts-off-towns-vermont-
york/story?id=14402696. Viewed October 24, 2015. 
Douglas, Scott L.; Bret M. Webb; and Roger Kilgore (FHWA 2014) Highways in the Coastal 
Environment: Assessing Extreme Events, Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 25  Volume 2, FHWA-
NHI-14-006, Office of Bridge Technology, Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), October, 
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/engineering/hydraulics/pubs/nhi14006/nhi14006.pdf.  
123 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Duwadi, Sheila Rimal (2010) Hazard Mitigation R&D Series: Article 1: Taking a Key Role in Reducing 
Disaster Risks, FHWA-HRT-10-004,  Department of Transportation (DOT)/Federal 
Highway Administration (FHWA), Vol. 73 No. 6, May/June, 
https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/publicroads/10mayjun/04.cfm. Viewed October 16, 2014. 
Elliott, Debbie (2013) Drought Causes Ripple Effect Along Mighty Mississippi River, All Things 
Considered, National Public Radio (NPR), http://www.npr.org/2013/01/30/170286658/drought-causes-
ripple-effect-along-mighty-mississippi-river. 
Englot, J. (2011) Case Study of Bridge and Tunnel TVAs: Since the Blue Ribbon Panel Recommendations 
for Bridge and Tunnel Security Were Issued, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), Reston, VA. 
Englot, J. and P. Bakas (2002) Performance/Design Criteria for the Airtrain JFK Guideway, 
Proceedings AREMA 2002 Annual Conference & Exposition, Washington, DC, September 22  25. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA 2008) Environmental Review Guide for Special Appropriation 
Grants, EPA Publication No: 315-K-08-001, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Washington, DC. 
Farokhi, K. et al. (2015) Value of Travel Time Reliability in Transportation Decision Making: Proof of 
ConceptMaryland, SHRP 2 Report S2-L35B-RW-1, Strategic Highway Research Program (SHRP).  
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA 2007) Hazardous Wildlife Attractants on or Near Airports, FAA 
Advisory Circular, AC 150/5200-33B, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA 2009) Airport Emergency Plan (Consolidated AC includes 
Change 2), FAA Advisory Circular, AC 150/5200-31C, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), 
Washington, DC. 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA 2010) Guidelines and Procedures for Maintenance of Airport 
Payments, FAA Advisory Circular, AC 150/5380-6C, Federal Aviation Administration, Washington, 
DC. 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA 2011) Development of State Standards and Nonprimary 
Airports, FAA Advisory Circular, AC 150/5100-13B, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), 
Washington, DC. 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA 2014 b) Maintenance of Airport Visual Aid Facilities. FAA 
Advisory Circular, AC 150/5340-26C, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA 2014a) Airport Pavement Management Program (PMP), FAA 
Advisory Circular, AC 150/5380-7B, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2013) Mitigation Assessment Team Report Hurricane 
Sandy in New Jersey and New York Building Performance Observations, Recommendations, and 
Technical Guidance, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2014a) Damaged Roads from Hurricane Irene, 
FEMA, last updated March 19, 2014, https://www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/images/61278. Viewed 
October 24, 2015. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2014b) Photograph by Andrea Booher taken on 07/09/1993 in 
Missouri, FEMA, last updated March 19, 2014, https://www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/images/38000. Viewed 
October 24, 2015. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2014c) Photograph by Marvin Nauman taken on 
09/27/2005 in Louisiana, FEMA, last updated March 19, 2014, https://www.fema.gov/media-
library/assets/images/46394. Viewed October 24, 2015.  
124 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2014d) Photograph by Win Henderson taken on 
09/20/2005, FEMA, last updated March 19, 2014, https://www.fema.gov/media-
library/assets/images/46243. Viewed October 24, 2015. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2014e) Photograph by Win Henderson taken on 
09/20/2005 in Louisiana, FEMA, last updated March 19, 2014, https://www.fema.gov/media-
library/assets/images/46290. Viewed October 24, 2015. 
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA 2008) Highways in the Coastal Environment, Second Edition, 
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), Washington, DC, June. 
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA 2011) Expanded FHWA Hydraulics Laboratory to Conduct 
Major New Bridge Scour Studies, Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), Washington, DC, 
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/focus/11aug/11aug02.cfm. Viewed April 24, 2015.  
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA 2015a) Aerodynamic Design of Highway Structures Federal 
Highway Administration (FHWA), Washington, DC, 
http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/publicroads/96winter/p96wi46.cfm. FHWA. 
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA 2015b) MAP-21: Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st 
Century. http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/map21/. Viewed April 23, 2015. FHWA, Washington, DC. 
Federal Transit Administration (FTA 2013) Transit Climate Change Adaption Assessment/Asset 
Management Pilot for the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority. FTA, Washington, DC. 
Field, C. B., Barros V., Stocker T. F., Qin D., Dokken D. J., Ebi K. L., Mastrandrea M. D., Mach K. J., 
Plattner G. -K., Allen S. K., Tignor M. and Midgley, P. M. (2012) Managing The Risks of Extreme Events 
and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation: A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of 
the Intergonvernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, New York. 
Frosch, Dan and Timothy Williams (2013). Colorado Towns are Left Stranded in Deadly Floods, The 
New York Times, September 12, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/13/us/colorado-towns-are-left-
stranded-in-deadly-floods.html?_r=0. Viewed October 14, 2015.  
International Navigation Association (2002b), Seismic Design Guidelines for Port Structures, CRC Press, 
Brussels. 
International Navigation Association (2002a) Guidelines for The Design of Fender Systems: 2002, Report 
of Working Group 33 of the Maritime Navigation Commission, PIANC. 
ITS International (ITS 2012) Success of Kuala Lumpur's dual purpose tunnel, ITS International, 2012. 
Johnson, Karl (2012) Abutments, MnDOT Bridge Office LRFD Workshop. 
Kentucky Public Service Commission (2009) Ike and Ice: The Kentucky Public Service Commission 
Report on the September 2008 Wind Storm and the January 2009 Ice Storm, November 19, 
https://psc.ky.gov/IkeIce/Report.pdf.  
Kruse, C. J.; A. Protopapas, L.E. Olson; and D.H. Bierling (2007) A Modal Comparison of Domestic 
Freight Transportation Effects on the General Public, Prepared by Center for Ports and Waterways, 
Texas Transportation Institute for  Department of Transportation Maritime Administration 
(MARAD) and National Waterways Foundation, December, 
http://www.marad.dot.gov/documents/Phase_II_Report_Final_121907.pdf. 
Lazo, L. (2013) Upgrading D.C.s Virginia Avenue tunnel is key to growing East Coast rail freight, 
officials say, The Washington Post, p. 1, 16 Februrary. 
125 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Mardorf, Christopher (2014) Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) August 30,. Napa, CA, 
http://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/1409613757983-
e7cfcdc60d36a0bc2aabef089f34d080/Napa_CA_Earthquake_V0A6397.jpg. Viewed October 1, 2014. 
Meng Q. and Qu, X. (2010) Quantitative Risk Assessment Model for Fire in Road Tunnels, University of 
Singapore, Singapore, 2010. 
Meyer, M., Flood, M., Keller, J., Lennon , J., McVoy, G., Dorney, C., Leonard, K., Hyman R. and Smith, 
J. (2014) Climate Change, Extreme Weather Events, and the Highway System: A Practitioner's Guide 
and Research Report, Strategic Issues Facing Transportation, Volume 2 NCHRP Report 750, 
Transportation Research Board (TRB), Washington, DC. 
Monroe County Climate Change Advisory Committee (2013) Monroe County Climate Action Plan, 
Monroe County, FL, March. 
Moritz, H., White, K., Langlois, H., Simm, J., Schrader, M., Engle, J., Smith, T., Harper, B., and Gill, S. 
(2012) Procedures to Evaluate Sea Level Change; Impacts; Responses and Adaption: U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers Approach, prepared by HR Wallingford Lts. Oxon, UK, January.  
National Association of Pipeline Safety Representatives (NAPSR 2013) Compendium of State Pipeline 
Safety Requirements & Initiatives Providing Increased Public Safety Levels Compared to Code of 
Federal Regulations, Second Edition. Washington, DC.  
National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS 2015) Unified Facilities Criteria (UFC), WBDG: Whole 
Building Design Guide, National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS), Washington, DC, 
https://www.wbdg.org/ccb/browse_cat.php?c=4. 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA 2014) Coastal Services Center (NOAA 2014) 
Port Tomorrow: Resilience Planning Tool. NOAA, 2014, http://coast.noaa.gov/digitalcoast/tools/port. 
Viewed 15 June 2014. 
New York City Department of Transportation (NYC DOT 2015) Ferries & Buses: Staten Island Ferry, 
NYC Resources, The City of New York, http://www.nyc.gov/html/dot/html/ferrybus/staten-island-
ferry.shtml. 
New York City Panel on Climate Change. (NPCC 2010) Climate Change Adaptation in New York City: 
Building a Risk Management Response, C. Rosenzweig and W. Solecki, eds, Prepared for use by the New 
York City Climate Change Adaptation Task Force, Annals of the New York Academy of Science, New 
York, NY. 
Pipelines and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA 2013) Pipelines and Hazard 
Mitigation for Emergency Managers, Draft, February 8, Pipelines and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA), Washington, DC. 
PWC (2013) Rebuilding for resilience: Fortifying insfrastructure to withstand disaster, September. 
RITA (2009) (USDOT Bureau of Transportation Statistics), 
http://www.rita.dot.gov/bts/sites/rita.dot.gov.bts/files/subject_areas/ncfo/highlights. 
Roll, Liz (2012), FEMA, November 1, 2012. Long Beach Island, NJ. http://www.fema.gov/media-
library/assets/images/65917. Viewed October 1, 2014. 
Rosenzweig, C.; A. DeGaetano; W. Solecki; R. Horton; M. OGrady; and D. Bader (2011) Climate 
Adaption Guidebook for New York State, State of New York. Albany, NY. 
Savonis, Mike (2009) Association of State and Territorial Soid Waste Management Officials, The Guld 
Coast Study, April 16, http://www.astswmo.org/Files/Meetings/2009/2009MidYearMtg/SAVONIS-
2009mym.pdf. Viewed April 24, 2015. FHWA 
126 
I  
Transportation Systems  
Sustainable Cities International (SCI 2010) Sustainable Cities: Our Cities are Our Future, Sustainable 
Cities International (SCI) http://sustainablecities.net/. Viewed July 22, 2015.  
The City of New York (2013) A Stronger, More Resilient New York, The City of New York, New York. 
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO 2009) ISO 31000:2009, Risk Management  
Principles and Guidelines, The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Geneva, 
Switzerland. 
The Port Authority of NY & NJ (PANYNJ 2011) Sustainable Infrastructure Guidelines Sustainable 
Infrastructure Guidelines, The Port Authority of NY & NJ (PANYNJ), 
https://www.panynj.gov/about/pdf/Sustainable-infrastructure-guidelines.pdf.  
The World Bank (2012) Building Urban Resilience: Principles, Tools and Practice, The World Bank, 
Washington, DC, 2012. 
Transportation Research Board (TRB 2014) Critical Issues in Aviation and the Environment, 
Transportation Research Board (TRB), Washington, DC, 2014. 
Transportation Research Board (TRB 2015a) Critical Transportation Infrastructure Protection (ABR10), 
Transportation Research Board (TRB), Washington, DC, http://www.trb.org/ABE40/ABE40.aspx. 
Viewed Apirl 24, 2015.  
Transportation Research Board (TRB 2015b) Special Task Force on Climate Change and Energy, 
Transportation Research Board (TRB), Washington, DC, http://www.trb.org/A0020T/A0020T.aspx. 
Viewed April 24, 2015. 
 Army Corps of Engineers (USACE 2002) Coastal Engineering Manual, Engineer Manual 
1110-2-1100,  Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), Washington, DC. 
 Army Corps of Engineers (USACE 2015) Flood Risk Management Program,  
Army Cops of Engineers (USACE), Alexandria, VA, 
http://www.iwr.usace.army.mil/Contact/ContactUs.aspx. Viewed October 27, 2015.  
 Department of Homeland Security (DHS 2013) 35,000 Gallons of Prevention: Containing a 
Tunnel Flood with an Inflatable Stopper,  Department of Homeland Security (DHS), 
http://www.dhs.gov/science-and-technology/35000-gallons-prevention. 
 Department of Transportation (DOT 2012) Climate Adaption Plan: Ensuring 
Transportation Infrastructure and System Resilience, 
https://www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.dev/files/docs/DOT%20Adaptation%20Plan.pdf.  
 Department of Transportation (DOT 2014) Facts & Stats, Pipeline Safety Awareness, 
 Department of Transportation (DOT)/Pipeline & Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration, https://opsweb.phmsa.dot.gov/pipelineforum/facts-and-stats/pipeline-101/. Viewed 
October 1, 2014. 
 Energy Information Administration (EIA 2012) New York/New Jersey Intra Harbor 
Petroleum Supplies Following Hurricane Sandy: Summary of Impacts Through November 13, 2012, 
 Department of Energy (DOE), Washington, DC, 
http://www.eia.gov/special/disruptions/hurricane/sandy/pdf/petroleum_terminal_survey.pdf. Viewed 
October 1, 2014. 
 Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC 2004) Presentation to the Association of 
Oil Pipe Lines, April, Washington, D.C., http://www.ferc.gov/industries/oil/gen-info.asp. Viewed 
October 1, 2014. 
127 
I  
Transportation Systems  
 Federal Transit Administration (USFTA 2013) 2013 Status Report of the Nations 
Highways, Bridges, and Transit: Conditions and Performance, Report to Congress by the  
Department of Transportation (DOT), Federal Highway Admnistration (FHWA), and Federal Transit 
Administration, https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policy/2013cpr/pdfs/cp2013.pdf. 
 Maritime Administration (MARAD 2015) Inland Waterways Gateway (St. Louis), United 
States Department of Transportation (DOT),  Maritime Administration (MARAD), 
http://www.marad.dot.gov/about-us/gateway-offices/inland-waterways-gateway/.  
URS Corporation (URS 2012) Port of Houston Authority Bayport Climate Change Study, URS and 
AECOM, http://www.urs.com/projects/port-of-houston-authority-greenhouse-gas-and-climate-change/. 
Wakeman, T. H. (2013) Final Report: Lessons from Hurricane Sandy for Port Resilience, The City 
College of New York, New York. 
World Association for Waterborne Transport Infrastructure (PIANC 2012) PIANC USA, World 
Association for Waterborne Transport Infrastructure (PIANC), Alexandria, VA, http://www.pianc.us/. 
Viewed on October 28, 2015. 
128 
I  
Energy Systems  
14. Energy Systems 
Energy Systems Executive Summary 
This chapter discusses electric power systems, natural gas and liquid fuels systems as they relate to 
electric power, and emergency and standby power systems. Pipelines that transport natural gas and liquid 
fuels are discussed as part of the Transportation System (Chapter 13) because the engineering standards 
for pipeline safety and design are administered by the U.S. DOT.  
The energy performance expectations and needs of society have increased dramatically over the past 35 
years. However, the aging U.S. infrastructure is a major issue for all communities. Electrical grid and 
pipeline distribution systems have evolved considerably since they were first constructed in the late 
1800s. The energy system continues to be upgraded to improve the existing electric power and fuel 
pipeline infrastructure systems, with focused efforts on energy efficiency, reliability, and reduced 
vulnerability to hazard events. However, permitting issues for new construction, weather events, and 
limited maintenance have contributed to power interruptions and failures. Demands for energy are 
expected to increase in the near future as the population increases.  
The reliance of communities on energy systems leads to public expectations of readily available and 
reliable services. The electric utility and liquid fuel industries are highly regulated to ensure energy 
availability with the goals of low consumer costs, safe delivery and use, and reliable service. Regulations, 
codes, and standards can help improve the performance of new and existing energy systems during storms 
and hazard events. Moving forward, the new challenge is to balance the goals of low pricing and safe 
delivery with energy systems that are both reliable and resilient. 
To build resilient and flexible energy systems there needs to be understanding by all stakeholders of the 
options and constraints that need to be balanced to achieve the desired level of community resilience, the 
expected benefits resilience may bring, and the estimated costs associated with improving and replacing 
the energy infrastructure.  
Achieving resilient energy systems within a community will not happen overnight. As part of the broader 
six-step planning process for resilience, community leaders, energy system representatives, and other 
stakeholders need to discuss what performance levels are desired, the current condition of the existing 
infrastructure systems, and what gaps exist between the desired performance and the anticipated 
performance of the various electric power and fuel systems.  
Working together to achieve resilience, each stakeholder group within the community (consumers, 
regulators, providers, and others) can identify meaningful solutions to address the resilience gaps. This 
Guide is focused on how the buildings and infrastructure systems support social needs and institutions 
within the community. This chapter is focused on improving the performance and hazard resistance of 
energy infrastructure systems while not adversely affecting service reliability and costs.  
Energy facilities and infrastructure systems for generation, transmission, and distribution functions can be 
sited, designed, and constructed to provide improved performance during hazard events. However, many 
of the codes and standards first used to ensure the safety and reliability of the infrastructure systems did 
not consider hazards, as modern codes and standards do now, leaving the physical infrastructure with 
some vulnerabilities. Codes and standards are being updated to address hazard events and are expected to 
also significantly improve resilience.  
A community that is successful in improving its resilience will likely do so through a combination of 
changes to the built environment as well as through adoption and implementation of regulatory, planning, 
and maintenance programs that are developed with buy in from all stakeholders.  
129 
I  
Energy Systems  
14.1. Introduction 
Societal expectations and needs for electric power and fuels has increased dramatically over the past 35 
years. In fact, the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) found that the total demand for 
residential electricity has increased by approximately 57 % since 1980 [EIA 2015]. However, as demand 
has increased, the condition of the energy infrastructure systems has become an issue for all communities.  
The electric power system includes power generation, transmission, and distribution facilities, some of 
which date back to the early 1800s. This system of generating plants, power lines, and substations is a 
mix of new and older systems and technologies that needs to operate cohesively. There are thousands of 
plants and systems across the U.S. and almost 400,000 miles of electric transmission lines. With the 
addition of new gas-fired and renewable generation, the need to add new transmission lines has become 
even greater [ASCE 2013]. 
Many transmission and distribution system outages have been attributed to system operations failures, 
although weather-related events have been the main cause of major electrical outages in the  
from 2007 to 2012. Reliability issues are also emerging as new energy sources replace older infrastructure 
[ASCE 2013]. 
The fuel industry includes oil and gas wells, processing plants (e.g., refineries), and pipeline systems. 
There are nominally 150,000 miles of crude oil and product pipelines and over 1,500,000 miles of natural 
gas transmission and distribution pipelines in the . Fuel infrastructure systems are primarily 
owned by private industry. Since 2008, a series of oil and gas pipeline failures led to new federal safety 
requirements in 2011 to address the increase in the number of incidents due to aging infrastructure and 
maintenance concerns [ASCE 2013]. 
Energy capacity is forecast to be a potential problem after 2020, particularly power generation capacity. 
The adequacy of energy pipelines and related operations is also a growing concern, partially due to 
capacity constraints in refineries and oil and gas transmission systems [ASCE 2013]. 
Electricity and fuel are essential, and cross-cutting services for community resilience. They support 
societys most basic human needs for food, water, and shelter. In a hazard event, electricity and fuel 
supply are critical to supporting human life and restoration of services. Having available fuel is essential 
for local generators in managing recovery and for emergency service and supply vehicles. 
The energy industry is making progress in upgrading the existing electric infrastructure with focused 
efforts on energy efficiency and reliability, and to reduce system vulnerability to hazard events. Grid 
modernization is a major effort nationwide that is projected to continue for years to come. For example, 
many utility providers are installing smart grid technologies.  
This chapter discusses electric power systems, natural gas and liquid fuels systems as they relate to 
electric power, and emergency and standby power systems. Pipelines that transport natural gas and liquid 
fuels are discussed as part of the transportation system (Chapter 13) because the engineering standards for 
pipeline safety and design are administered by the U.S. DOT.  
14.1.1. Social Needs and System Performance Goals 
Reliable, inexpensive power has become a basic societal necessity. Even in day-to-day power delivery, 
utilities may struggle to meet consumer expectations. Preparing for and responding to hazard events can 
be challenging when utilities are repairing infrastructure while experiencing revenue losses when electric 
power delivery is suspended. Regulatory authorities consider such issues when addressing utility rate 
recovery cases and setting public expectations for post-event recovery timelines and quality of service. 
As communities address issues related to energy system performance and improving grid resilience, it is 
important that they prioritize and balance end user needs, public safety, and restoration requirements 
130 
I  
Energy Systems  
relative to community resilience goals. Designers and operators of energy systems need to adapt to ever-
changing technologies and applications, as well as minimize vulnerabilities in the system and incorporate 
the ability to rapidly restore the system after hazard events. Communities and utility operators should 
consider options that protect, maintain, and recover the system while controlling costs.  
When events occur and recovery efforts are required, emergency-related societal needs are addressed 
first, and other priorities are addressed through a tiered response. Although details of recovery planning 
can be complex, the general sequence of recovery is often organized as critical facilities and services, 
emergency housing, housing and neighborhoods, and community. Section 14.3 discusses performance 
goals for energy infrastructure systems based on these restoration stages. Recovery levels for new and 
existing infrastructure are discussed in Section 14.5.1.2. 
14.1.2. Reliability, Resilience, and Energy Assurance  
Reliability and resilience are related but distinct concepts with different performance goals and metrics. In 
many cases, projects and investments that improve day-to-day reliability contribute to resilience.  
In August 2013, the Presidents Council of Economic Advisers released a study on the benefits of 
investing in grid resilience. The study [Executive Office of the President 2013] explained the difference 
between resilience and reliability as:  
A more resilient grid is one that is better able to sustain and recover from adverse 
events like severe weather  a more reliable grid is one with fewer and shorter power 
interruptions. 
In September 2012, Marylands Grid Resiliency Task Force [Office of Governor Martin OMalley 2012] 
adopted similar definitions for resilience and reliability. 
[R]eliability refers to the ability of the bulk power and distribution systems to deliver 
electricity to customers during normal blue sky operationsResiliency refers to the 
ability of the distribution system to absorb stresses without experiencing a sustained 
outage. 
The electric power industry is beginning to address resilience and the recovery of service after hazard 
events in addition to reliability of service during normal operations. The Public Service Enterprise Group 
[PSEG 2014] in New Jersey states in its Energy Strong Program that: 
Reliability remains fundamental but is no longer enough now that extreme storms have 
become increasingly common and people are more dependent on electricity than ever 
before.  
An analysis of the stakeholder input gathered at the California Local Energy Assurance Planning 
[CaLEAP 2015] workshops concluded that a resilient energy system would include the followings goals 
and steps: 
x Includes planned, modeled, and prepared infrastructure; ready for immediate and reliable 
deployment; robust (hardened) where appropriate 
x Supports emergency response, life safety, restoration effectiveness, and socio-economic 
continuity during a major event 
x Recovers rapidly after hazard events 
x Incorporates redundancy and spare capacity 
x Supports a diversity of energy sources  
131 
I  
Energy Systems  
x Includes modular or loosely-coupled architecture 
x Is aware and responsive to electrical and environmental conditions 
x Is actively monitored and maintained 
x Operates efficiently in non-emergency conditions 
x Provides economic and societal benefits to the communities and stakeholders served 
In addition to reliability and resilience, the energy industry has 
developed energy assurance concepts, which also align with resilience 
concepts. A report (Figure 14-1) by the National Association of State 
Energy Officials, the State Energy Assurance Guideline [NASEO 
2009], refers to the 4 Rs of resilient qualities for infrastructure 
systems: 
x Robustness  the inherent strength or resistance in a system to 
withstand external demands without degradation or loss of 
functionality 
x Redundancy  system properties that allow for alternate 
options, choices, and substitutions when the system is under 
stress  
x Resourcefulness  the capacity to mobilize needed resources Figure 14-1: NASEO [2009] 
and services in emergencies Energy Assurance 
Guidelines 
x Rapidity  the speed with which disruption can be overcome 
and safety, services, and financial stability restored 
A resilience strategy may address each of these qualities to achieve the desired performance of an energy 
system. In addition, resilience of an energy system may be evaluated according to physical, 
organizational, social, and economic systems, where: 
x Physical  the ability of physical systems (including all interconnected components) to perform 
to acceptable/desired levels when subject to hazard events 
x Organizational  the capacity of organizations - especially those managing critical facilities and 
hazard event-related functions - to make decisions and take actions that contribute to resilience 
x Social  consisting of measures specifically designed to support social institutions and lessen the 
extent to which communities and governmental jurisdictions suffer negative consequences due to 
loss of critical services due to a hazard event 
x Economic  the capacity to reduce both direct and indirect economic losses resulting from a 
hazard event 
Reliability of energy systems refers to providing uninterrupted service during normal operations and is a 
core goal of electric power operators. As energy systems have become essential to daily life, resilient 
energy systems that can recovery rapidly from hazard events are also needed. 
14.1.3. Dependencies  
In general, buildings and infrastructure systems depend on electric power to conduct business and provide 
their services. For example, although a hospital or emergency operations center may not be physically 
damaged by a hurricane, flood, or earthquake, loss of power largely equates to loss of services. 
132 
I  
Energy Systems  
Emergency power may be used to support critical services until commercial power is restored if fuel is 
available for standby systems.  
Energy systems depend on other systems as well. Some examples are: 
x Operation and control centers of utilities rely on communication and information systems to send 
and receive operational information to the generation, transmission, and distribution components 
of the grid. Operational control needs to be maintained or the performance of the grid will be 
affected. 
x Liquid fuels rely on the transportation system to distribute liquid and natural gas by truck and rail. 
Disruptions to the transportation system can affect the supply chain and resilience of the energy 
system (see 13.2.5 Pipelines for additional information). 
x The ability to restore infrastructure in the electric power system can be seriously hampered if 
plant facilities or roads are damaged, and staff cannot perform response and recovery activities.  
14.2. Energy Infrastructure  
Energy infrastructure systems nationwide are designed for reliable service. While they are designed to 
meet National Electric Safety Codes [IEEE 2012] requirements (and often beyond the minimum criteria), 
the level or magnitude of hazard events that these systems can withstand without damage is not clearly 
defined. Over the years, improvements in technology have addressed some vulnerabilities or risks in the 
system, but may also have inadvertently introduced some new ones.  
The electric power industry has primarily focused on energy assurance goals and reliability of service for 
normal operations. The energy infrastructure continues to be improved, with some improvement 
following hazard events.  
As communities and energy providers begin to address resilience, guidelines are needed for design of 
energy systems  generation, transmission and distribution - and understanding of improvements needed 
to meet desired performance goals. Some questions to consider when evaluating existing systems might 
include: 
x Why did previous failures occur? 
x Were the design criteria adequate for the hazard event?  
x Was the extent and impact of the failures disproportionate to the magnitude of the event that 
occurred?  
x If so, was the failure or impact due to the design and construction or a poor operational response? 
x Can other technologies or approaches be used to improve performance and recovery?  
This section describes the electric power system and its generation, transmission, and distribution systems 
and emerging technologies in these systems. Liquid fuel systems and natural gas systems, with a focus on 
how they are used to support electric power systems, are presented. The use of emergency and standby 
power systems for recovery of services after hazard events are also discussed. 
14.2.1. Electric Power 
The electric power system produces and delivers electricity through a grid connection to customers. 
Electric power can be generated by central power stations or by distributed generation. Once generated, 
power is delivered to customers through transmission and distribution systems. The electric power system 
is illustrated in Figure 14-2 [NIST 2014].  
133 
I  
Energy Systems  
 
Figure 14-2: NIST smart grid conceptual model [Source: NIST 2014] 
In 2009, NIST established the Smart Grid Interoperability Panel (SGIP) and developed the Smart Grid 
Conceptual Model shown in Figure 14-2. This model is a simple mechanism for graphically describing 
the domains within the Smart Grid. The model reflects advances in smart grid technologies and 
developments from NISTs collaborative work with industry stakeholders. 
For simplicity, and to remain focused on the primary components within the bulk electric power network, 
this Guide focuses primarily on generation, transmission, and distribution systems. Note that the natural 
gas delivery system has a similar architecture and terminology. 
14.2.1.1. Generation 
Traditional power generation is supported through bulk power plants that incorporate large electrical 
generators. In the U.S., this power is 3-phase alternating current (AC). The generation system is evolving 
and has been for some time. Prior to deregulation of electricity in certain states, public utilities owned and 
managed both the generation and transmission grid over which electricity was delivered. Deregulation 
separated generation and transmission, with most deregulated states allowing independent power 
producers (IPP) to competitively develop generation projects. The term deregulation does not imply 
these utilities are not regulated, simply that consumer choice exists. IPP developers negotiate contracts to 
sell power to the utilities, who maintain their responsibility to manage and deliver the electricity through 
the grid. There is a patchwork of regulated and deregulated states so, depending on the state, a utility 
could control transmission, generation, or both. A similar patchwork of regulation and deregulation at the 
state level also applies to the distribution of natural gas by utilities. 
134 
I  
Energy Systems  
Renewable power projects, distributed generation by commercial entities, and demand-side management 
(such as demand response, energy efficiency, and energy storage) are alternate methods available to the 
traditional energy systems. The term generation increasingly includes virtual generation, resulting from 
load-reduction to offset power demand or the use of energy storage rather than developing new generation 
capacity. Additionally, alternate methods are evolving behind the meter at homes and businesses, such as 
rooftop solar panels and smart meters. 
Renewable power comes in many forms  wind, solar, biomass, hydropower. In some states energy-from-
waste plants also meets the definition of renewable power. Renewable power has rules that vary from 
state to state in the same way the Renewable Portfolio Standards (RPS), with goals for the percentage of 
power to be generated from renewables, vary by state. 
Distributed generation is an umbrella term typically describing power plants developed for a specific 
company or industrial location, also known as in-the-fence power, that serve the needs of a particular 
commercial plant, manufacturing facility or industrial park. These plants must be developed in 
accordance with requirements for their particular state, but are typically single or small group load-
serving entities. An example might be an industrial facility that builds its own on-site power plant to serve 
its electric power needs. Often these generating plants are also cogeneration facilities, providing steam for 
heat or another industrial process use. Many of these smaller facilities are also referred to as Combined-
Heat and Power or CHP plants. 
In regulated states, Demand Side Management (DSM) is defined by the Energy Information 
Administration as the planning, implementation, and monitoring of utility activities designed to 
encourage consumers to modify patterns of electricity usage, including the timing and level of electricity 
demand. Thus, DSM includes both energy efficiency (EE) and demand response (DR) to reduce electric 
power demand.  
Energy efficiency at the utility level is a method or program by which the utility manages or reduces the 
demand for power. Otherwise, a utility may need to build or contract for new generation plants or 
purchase additional power on the spot market, which can be expensive. These programs can be state-wide 
improvements to public buildings (efficient light bulbs, improved insulation, etc.) or can entail energy 
efficiency programs for residential users, which may include advanced meters and thermostats.  
Demand Response (DR) is sometimes implemented by a non-utility company that enters into a contract 
with electric power users, usually large users such as universities, high-rise office buildings, or chains of 
retail stores. The DR company pays the contracted users to lower their electric use during times of peak 
demand, such as hot summer days. The DR company then sells the reduced-load to the utility during peak 
demand periods. Large users of electricity can lower their annual electric power costs through the DR 
payment and the utility can avoid brown-outs or black-outs, spot market purchases, or the need to develop 
new generation capacity.  
Energy storage comes in many forms, from large batteries to pump storage, fly wheels, and compressed 
air. In the case of pump storage, which has a long history in electrical power systems, water is pumped up 
to a dam or holding basin during periods of low demand (non-peak periods) and is released during periods 
of high demand to meet the energy load. The use of pump storage is being expanded to use compressed 
air and other methods, such as flywheels, that can delay release of energy. 
Traditionally, power generation was the primary means of meeting electric power demand. Today, 
alternative methods reduce, offset, or delay peak demand and play a larger role in the grid. Traditional 
and alternate methods need to be considered as a part of the system that delivers reliable and efficient 
power.  
135 
I  
Energy Systems  
14.2.1.2. Transmission 
In the traditional bulk power system, 3-phase power exits the generator and enters a transmission 
substation. Voltages are transformed to travel long distances along three separate transmission lines, each 
carrying a single phase. The transmission infrastructure is primarily wire and towers carrying high voltage 
power from generators to distribution substations. It is the middle-man of the electric power delivery 
network. 
The vulnerability of the transmission infrastructure primarily stems from aging physical assets. As 
customer load requirements grow and the various federal and state regulations change, there is a need for 
more robust and flexible electric power delivery systems to keep up with demand. The emergence of the 
renewable generation market and the transition from coal generation to natural gas generation has stressed 
the power grid beyond its original design. Electrical flows that were designed to be in one direction are 
now in multiple directions, depending on the location of the power generation at any particular time of 
day. Transmission constraints, which affect cost and reliability, have become common in operations.  
Over the last 10 years, transmission planning has evolved from relatively few new transmission lines 
being built nationwide to many new transmission lines being planned by most major utilities. The cost 
and time to build new transmission lines has increased significantly due to acquisition of new routes, and 
meeting regulatory and environmental requirements.  
Electric power demands impact transmission system reliability. Cyber-based monitoring systems are 
being developed to reduce the impact of hazards. As new systems are engineered and constructed, there is 
also a need to evaluate current performance and maintenance. The performance of transmission lines has 
improved with NERCs FAC-003-3 Transmission Vegetation Management Program. The purpose of 
FAC 003-3 is to provide the guidance needed to maintain a reliable electric transmission system by 
using a defense-in-depth strategy to manage vegetation located on transmission rights of way (ROW) and 
minimize encroachments from vegetation located adjacent to the ROW, thus preventing the risk of those 
vegetation-related outages that could lead to Cascading.  
Many efforts are underway to strengthen the nations transmission systems, including over 170 
transmission projects by members of the Edison Electrical Institute that are anticipated to occur in the 
next decade [EEI 2015]. Several major Smart Grid transmission projects have been initiated and, in some 
cases, recently completed to improve power supply across the nation. Other efforts to increase grid 
resilience and efficiency include developing and deploying new technologies (e.g., Demand Response, 
Micro-grid/Islanding, Synchrophasers (PMU), Dynamic Transfer, Energy Imbalance Markets (EIM) and 
Dynamic Line Rating (DLR)). FERC also issued Order 1000 [FERC 2011] to help reduce capital costs of 
transmission by introducing competition between utilities and transmission developers. 
Transmission infrastructure is vulnerable to hazards. Flooding can damage low-lying electrical 
infrastructure, such as substations, as was the case with Hurricanes Sandy and Irene [DOE 2013]. Flowing 
water can scour pole foundations and expose underground cables. Flood hazards can also inundate 
underground electrical conduits, vaults, substations, and splices.  
Wind events, such as tornadoes, hurricanes, and thunderstorms, can damage electrical infrastructure. 
Thunderstorms can topple trees and damage structures. Ice may form around transmission lines and 
increase the loads on the transmission systems, particularly when accompanied by high winds, sometimes 
leads to failure of the system. Lightning and geo-magnetically induced currents in transmission lines are 
additional hazards to be managed. 
Depending upon the wildfire risk, communities may need measures to protect transmission systems for 
exposure to fire. Every year, wildfires burn thousands of acres and destroy homes and other structures. 
Alternatively, electrical lines have been implicated in starting wildfires, as was the case in the 2007 San 
Diego Witch Creek, Guejito and Rice wildfires [SDUT 2007].  
136 
I  
Energy Systems  
14.2.1.3. Distribution 
In the traditional power delivery system, the distribution system begins at the distribution substation. The 
substation takes high voltage power and transforms it to less than 10 000 volts (typically 7200 volts). The 
distribution substation is critical to the power delivery system and is a focus area for mitigation and rapid 
recovery. It supports a variety of operations technology (OT) and information technology (IT) equipment 
and systems that connect the utility operation center to the endpoint loads. The distribution system is by 
far the largest component of the electric power system. During post-event recovery, the majority of 
repairs are normally within the distribution network. Distribution systems are typically located along 
roadsides but may also go through less accessible lots and other right-of-ways.  
Maintaining distribution systems can be challenging. The poles and key equipment are subject to 
overloading by addition of other wires and system components by local service providers. These additions 
may overload electrical system components or increase their vulnerability to wind and ice loads. High 
ambient temperatures can also reduce cable lifetimes and insulation integrity. 
The distribution system is vulnerable to a number of hazard events. Overhead distribution lines are 
particularly vulnerable to tree-related damage during wind events. Trees often fall and damage the 
distribution network. Therefore, vegetation management is critical to minimizing vulnerability of 
distribution lines to high wind events [EPRI 2013]. Most utilities have tree management programs, but 
failure to adequately implement these programs has been a leading cause of outages [FERC 2013, NERC 
2015a]. The reason for this failure is not always simple. Even though the utility may have a vegetation 
management program, public and private land owners may not allow removal of trees or limbs on their 
private property. Other jurisdictions and environmental organizations have stopped tree trimming and 
clearing programs. The aggregate impact of these actions results in failed implementation of tree 
trimming programs, which can increase distribution system vulnerability.  
Winds that change direction throughout a storm, such as hurricanes and tornadoes, can cause extensive 
damage, including failure of poles. As a result of observations after the 2004 and 2005 hurricane seasons, 
Florida now requires inspections to look for poles that are overloaded from mounted equipment, are 
degraded at the ground interface, or have other weakness [Florida Public Service Commission 2007, 
NextEra Energy Inc. 2013]. Instead of a 15-year pole inspection cycle, Florida has implemented an 8-year 
inspection cycle [NextEra Energy Inc. 2013]. Poles that look perfectly fine from a visual inspection may 
not be fine internally or underground. Therefore, new inspection tools and techniques have been 
developed to help with pole inspection.  
Lightning is a particular concern for the electrical power infrastructure. When a transformer is 
overloaded, either by a lightning strike or by an overload on the circuit, it typically catches on fire. The 
resulting blaze can consume the transformer, the pole to which it is attached, and nearby vegetation as 
flaming oil falls to the ground. Poles that have filled with water can explode when the water inside flashes 
to steam. 
Lightning can travel along conductors, even when a line is down and de-energized. Lightning can strike a 
downed line and travel along it, until it reaches a lightning arrestor or a fusible link. Damage to home 
appliances and consumer electronics can occur when lightning strikes a line beyond an outage point. 
Surge protectors, uninterruptible power supply (UPS) systems, and other protection equipment can help 
protect equipment, but only unplugging equipment from power sources ensures that a lightning strike will 
not disable it.  
Earthquakes may cause widespread damage to distribution systems, with little or no warning, through 
strong ground shaking, landslides, liquefaction, or ground shifting. Additionally, they can lead to other 
failures and cascading events, such as fires and ruptured water mains, which in turn may damage 
electrical infrastructure systems. These events may damage poles or break electrical lines. Unless 
carefully designed for potential earthquake ground movement, distribution lines may fail if there is 
137 
I  
Energy Systems  
insufficient slack in the lines to allow them to accommodate the ground movement, particularly near fault 
lines. Overhead lines tend to perform better than underground lines near fault lines because the lines have 
some slack and their supporting structures flex as well. Top loaded poles (those with transformers, 
voltage regulators, etc.) tend to fail first in an earthquake.  
Many efforts are underway to improve distribution systems. There are mitigation programs and projects 
underway across the nation, such as lightning arresters. Some utilities are encasing fuses so hot metal 
pieces will not fall and potentially cause fires. There has also been a movement away from wood poles. 
Where wood poles are still being used, some utilities are increasing the size and class to meet design 
criteria.  
14.2.1.4. Emerging Technologies 
Many smart grid technologies available today are targeted to help electric utilities improve reliability, 
operating efficiency, and power quality, and to identify potential opportunities to improve circuits. Many 
utilities are working on smart grid integration to support better prediction of performance, as well as 
identify corrective actions.  
Technology has also helped utilities rapidly correct power outages. Many utilities have implemented 
some form of distribution automation, and other technologies to improve the reliability and resilience of 
the electric power system.  
This section examines the potential role of microgrids, renewable energy, fuel cells/energy storage, and 
demand side management in improving resilience in communities and the electric power system.  
Microgrids. With regards to energy resilience, microgrids are one of the most profound emerging 
technology opportunities. Microgrids connect customer loads with distributed energy resources (DERs) 
within a defined boundary. The electric grid, or macro grid, treats the DER as a single entity; the 
microgrid manages the DERs and loads independently. Microgrids can be connected or disconnected 
from the grid and can operate independently in an island mode. They can help meet organizational 
mission requirements, participate in electric power markets, increase energy reliability and resilience, and 
incorporate renewable energy resources. 
Microgrids can be implemented at numerous points in the electric power system. The most fundamental 
division is customer-side or utility-side implementation. Customer-side microgrids can be designed and 
implemented for specific operational and business requirements, and may even be designed to operate as 
an extension of an emergency generator backup system. The difference is that a microgrid is designed to 
provide full energy services for an extended period of time. A customer-side microgrid can be 
implemented to ensure business continuity during a disruptive hazard event. Recently, a major Fortune 
100 corporation included a microgrid as part of its new company campus headquarters to allow full 
operation of the facility for an unlimited time after an earthquake. A clear business case could be made 
for implementing a microgrid by extracting value from the technology during normal operations.  
In contrast, a utility-side microgrid has the challenge of balancing utility regulatory requirements with the 
technology investment. Many stakeholders are involved in such decisions. Microgrids have been studied 
as a potential solution by New York, Connecticut, and California, as well as the U.S. Department of 
Energy. These studies consider how some of the regulatory frameworks may influence the ability to 
incorporate microgrids.  
Microgrids are not simple, interchangeable systems. They should operate and provide value when the grid 
is operational, but require long-term operational expertise and maintenance commitment. However, in 
some cases the value for microgrids may occur when loss of critical operations poses a significant risk to 
public safety or security. Facilities essential to community recovery that may benefit from considering or 
implementing microgrid solutions include: 
138 
I  
Energy Systems  
x Critical facilities (City Hall, Police, Fire, 911, etc.) 
x Hospitals and medical centers 
x Government facilities 
x Key businesses for recovery, such as grocery stores, drug stores, large employers, gas stations 
Renewable energy generation. Renewable energy comes from natural sources that are frequently and 
sustainably replenished. When power is interrupted, renewable energy generation can support 
uninterrupted or reduced capacity service to energy consumers. The use of renewable energy is not new, 
but emerging technology, equipment, software, and systems are evolving at a fast pace. The two primary 
emerging renewable energy generation resources are solar and wind power generation systems.  
x Solar photovoltaic (PV). The photovoltaic process converts light into direct current (DC) 
electricity. Solar cell modules supply DC electricity at a certain voltage (e.g. 12 VDC). The 
amount of current depends on the amount of light that enters the module. When multiple modules 
are strung together, a solar PV array is constructed that can produce more electricity. PV arrays 
are configured in series or in parallel to provide different voltage and current combinations. PV 
systems are being used in a variety of scenarios, ranging from small rooftop units that provide 
supplemental power to large solar farms that provide megawatts (MW) of power. The technology 
continues to improve with better efficiency conversions of light into electricity and improved 
materials. A high percentage of PV systems in the local distribution system needs to be 
coordinated with and managed by the utility as variable distributed resources. 
x Wind power. Wind power is one of the oldest forms of renewable energy and has been harnessed 
by man for many centuries. The basic process uses turbines to capture the winds energy and 
convert it into mechanical power. The mechanical power has been used to pump and move water, 
and to grind grain and corn in mills. It can also be used to create electricity through a generator. 
Although the same basic principles apply, wind generation today occurs on a large scale. Farms 
of wind turbines and generators are found throughout the Midwest, Texas, the coasts, offshore, 
and deserts. Some wind farms produce many megawatts (MW) of power.  
Fuel cells and energy storage. Fuel cells and batteries are two new technologies being developed to 
increase the number of methods available for energy storage. 
x Fuel cells. Fuel cells create electricity through chemical reactions. The reaction is controllable 
and can be tuned to manage the amount of electricity produced. The types of fuels vary, but 
require oxygen and hydrogen in their chemistry. The waste from fuel cells is clean, producing 
water. Fuel cells have a variety of uses and have been popular concepts in the automotive 
industry to support environmentally-friendly hydrogen vehicles. The technology continues to 
evolve with different fuel sources, cheaper solutions, and higher capacities. 
x Battery energy storage. Battery storage systems are the next innovation for energy resiliency, 
power quality, and energy efficiency. The concept is simple: when demand is low, charge the 
batteries; when demand is high, use battery power. Batteries are often big, expensive, and do not 
last as long as desired. Also, there are very few incentives for investment in battery technology. 
The landscape is slowly changing and states like California and New York are performing battery 
studies and pilots. This emerging technology could have an enormous impact on how the grid is 
managed and combined with renewable energy generation.  
Demand side management. Demand side management (DSM) systems can modify patterns of customer 
electricity usage, including the timing and level of demand. The ability for customer loads to respond to 
external controls during an energy system emergency supports energy system performance during the 
event and afterwards when restorative actions are underway. This is especially important when microgrids 
139 
I  
Energy Systems  
are used on either the customer side or utility side of the meter. A key challenge in managing a microgrid 
is maintaining load and generation balance to keep the system stable. 
Customer side backup generation solutions, which are not intended for long term operation or support of 
normal business operations, typically only meet emergency loads. More sophisticated systems may 
integrate renewable energy sources, fuel cells, and energy storage and interact with building automation 
systems to control building loads and optimize the performance of the system for short or long term 
operation.  
Utility-side microgrids may also use DSM to effectively manage local feeder and substation level 
microgrids to ensure system stability and maximize the number of customers that can be served by 
systems that remain intact after a hazard event or are restored. DSM techniques can also be used at the 
bulk level to manage transmission loading constraints that may exist during or after a hazard event. 
14.2.2. Liquid Fuel 
The most common liquid fuels are gasoline, diesel, and kerosene-based products, such as jet fuels, that are 
produced from petroleum. Other liquid fuels include compressed natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas 
(LPG), synthetic fuels produced from natural gas or coal, biodiesel, and alcohols. For resilience, liquid 
fuels are critical to back-up power generation and nearly all modes of transportation. In addition, 11 % of 
U.S. homes rely on heating oil or propane, with heating oil usage concentrated in the Northeast and 
propane usage concentrated in rural areas [USEIA 2009]. 
Although less than 1 % of all electricity in the U.S. is generated in oil-fired plants, there are some isolated 
markets in which petroleum remains the primary fuel. The leading example is Hawaii, where more than 
70 % of electricity generation is fueled by petroleum [USEIA 2014a].  
U.S. refineries tend to be geographically concentrated and operate at 90 % or more of capacity during 
periods of strong economic growth [USEIA 2014b]. The reliability and resilience of U.S. refinery 
capacity is both a national security issue and a major regional economic issue in those areas of the U.S. 
where refinery capacity is concentrated. 
Liquid fuel production, storage, and distribution systems include: 
x Production fields 
x Transport systems between production sites, refineries, and regional distribution centers, which 
may include ports, pipelines, and rail 
x Refineries, which may include storage vessels, facilities, equipment, and power supplies. 
x Regional distribution systems, including storage facilities such as tank farms, pipelines, trucks, 
and pumping stations  
Regardless of where production and refinery capacity are located, all communities need to understand 
their fuel systems, including transport, storage, and distribution of fuel products. Damage to ports, tank 
farms, pipelines, railways or roadways can cause serious delays to the distribution of liquid fuels which, 
in turn, can lead to loss of backup power generation when onsite fuel supplies are exhausted. During cold 
weather periods, disruption to heating fuel supplies also has the potential of becoming a significant issue. 
An example of vulnerabilities associated with the transport, storage, and distribution of fuel product can 
be seen in the energy portion of the Oregon Resilience Plan, which was developed for a magnitude 9.0 
earthquake event on the Cascadia subduction zone. The Oregon study identifies the northwest industrial 
area of Portland as Oregons Critical Energy Infrastructure (CEI) Hub. More than 90 % of Oregons 
refined petroleum products pass through this area before being distributed throughout the state. Potential 
hazards to liquid fuel storage and distribution networks include ground shaking, sloshing, liquefaction, 
140 
I  
Energy Systems  
lateral spreading, landslides, settlement, bearing capacity failures, fire, seiches in the CEI Hub area, and 
tsunami damage along the coast. Fuel is transported to the site via a liquid fuel transmission pipeline from 
the north and marine vessels. Alternative modes of transporting fuel from the east or south or by air are 
limited. Key recommendations for improving the resilience of the Oregon energy system include 
conducting vulnerability assessments, developing mitigation plans, diversifying transportation corridors 
and storage locations, providing alternate means fuel delivery to end users, and coordinated planning for 
future systems and recovery [OSSPAC 2013]. 
The American Lifelines Association [ALA 2005] identified the performance measures and metrics for 
pipeline systems shown in Table 14-1. 
A qualitative ranking of typical pipeline system components and facilities vulnerability to hazards from 
the ALA [2005] study is reproduced in Table 14-2. 
Table 14-1: The American Lifelines Association high-level performance measures and performance 
metrics for pipeline systems [Adapted from ALA 2005] 
System Performance Metrics 
Desired Outcomes  
Capital  Revenue  Service Disruption  Casualties  
(Performance Targets) Downtime  Lost  
Losses Losses (% service (deaths, 
(hours) Product 
($) ($) population) injuries) 
Protect public and utility     X X 
personnel safety 
Maintain system   X X   
reliability 
Prevent monetary loss X X X X  X 
Prevent environmental      X 
damage 
141 
I  
Energy Systems  
Table 14-2: Qualitative ranking of typical pipeline system components and facilities 
vulnerability to hazards to [Adapted from ALA 2005] 
Degree of Vulnerability 
 
 
 
 
Hazards  
   
  
 Regulations /  
Transmission PipelinesPump StationsCompressor StationsProcessing FacilitiesStorage TanksControl SystemsMaintenance Operations Buildings & EquipmentPressure Metering StationsDistribution PipelinesService Lines or Connections
Natural Hazards 
Earthquake shaking L M M M H M H L L M 
Earthquake permanent ground deformations (fault H - - - L - - L H M 
rupture, liquefaction, landslide and settlement) (Buried) 
Ground movements (landslide, frost heave, H - - - L - - L H M 
settlement) (Buried) 
Flooding (riverine, storm surge, tsunami and seiche) L H H H M H H H L M 
Wind (hurricane, tornado) L (Aerial) - - - - L L - - - 
Icing L - - - - - - - L - 
Collateral hazard: blast or fire M H H H H M L L L M 
Collateral hazard: dam inundation L H H H M H H H L M 
Collateral hazard: nearby collapse - L L L - L L L M L 
Human Threats 
Physical attack (biological, chemical, radiological M M M M - M M - M - 
and blast) 
Cyber attack - L L L - H L - L - 
Note: Degrees of vulnerability: H = High, M = Moderate, L = Low. For a component or system located within a 
building, the vulnerability of both the building and component should be considered. For example, where there is a 
potential building collapse or mandatory evacuation, the equipment housed within is at risk. The Table 14-2 entries 
assume the component is of recent vintage, i.e., post 1945. 
142 
I  
Energy Systems  
14.2.3. Natural Gas 
Natural gas pipelines and storage facilities comprise a vast infrastructure that services 65 million homes, 5 
million businesses, 193,000 factories and 5,500 electric generating facilities [McDonough 2013]. There 
are nominally over 3.9 million km (2.4 million miles) of natural gas pipelines in the continental U.S., with 
pipelines running along roads and private easements under both urban and rural lands [McDonough 
2013].  
Natural gas pipelines are buried structures and, therefore, predominantly damaged by events that affect 
the soil, such as ground shaking, liquefaction, and ground rupture. Specific points of failure may be 
predicted when rupture or liquefaction occurs, but the most damaging event on a wide scale is ground 
shaking [Nadeau 2007]. Existing weaknesses or aging effects, which may be the first points of failure, can 
include corrosion, poor welds, and weak or strained material. Regular maintenance can have a beneficial 
effect, as can upgrading piping from iron (used in older pipeline) to plastic (for low-pressure distribution 
lines) or steel pipe.  
Fuel cells are being use as a power source to achieve a more resilient natural gas infrastructure. Fuel cells 
provide a decentralized, reliable source of power that has proven useful in hazard events. They are 
considered a distributed resource by IEEE. For example, during Hurricane Sandy, one manufacturer put 
60 fuel cells in place to provide backup power to cell phone towers. These were the only cell towers that 
remained operational during and after the storm [Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Energy Association 2014]. 
Aboveground facilities that support processes such as compressor stations, processing plants, meter 
stations, and wells are the most vulnerable parts of the natural gas system. For example, unusually cold 
weather in 2011 caused interruptions in natural gas service in the Southwest, which, in turn, caused 
outages at gas-fired electric generating facilities that were experiencing high demand for electricity. A 
joint report by FERC and NERC [FERC and NERC 2011) concluded these outages and disruptions of 
service were caused by weather-related mechanical problems such as frozen sensing lines, equipment, 
water lines and valves. The report recommended adopting minimum winterization standards for natural 
gas production and processing facilities, and suggested that additional underground natural gas storage 
capacity in the region could have ameliorated the impacts of natural gas supply shortages.  
14.2.4. Emergency and Standby Power 
Emergency and standby power are often used to improve recovery of functions and community resilience. 
Some infrastructure elements are required by code provisions to have emergency or standby power. For 
others, it is a non-mandated option available to provide a service. 
IEEE [1995] defines an emergency power system as an independent reserve source of electric energy 
that, upon failure or outage of the normal source, automatically provides reliable electric power within a 
specified time to critical devices and equipment whose failure to operate satisfactorily would jeopardize 
the health and safety of personnel or result in damage to property. 
The National Electric Code, or NEC [NFPA 2014], defines emergency systems as those systems legally 
required and classed as emergency by municipal, state, federal, or other codes, or by any governmental 
agency having jurisdiction. These systems are intended to automatically supply illumination, power, or 
both, to designated areas and equipment in the event of failure of the normal supply or in the event of 
accident to elements of a system intended to supply, distribute, and control power and illumination 
essential for safety to human life. 
143 
I  
Energy Systems  
The NEC [NFPA 2014] divides standby power systems into two categories: 
x Legally Required Standby Systems. Those systems required and so classed as legally 
required standby by municipal, state, federal, and other codes or by any 
governmental agency having jurisdiction. These systems are intended to 
automatically supply power to selected loads (other than those classed as emergency 
systems) in the event of failure of the normal source. Legally required standby 
systems are typically installed to serve loads, such as heating and refrigeration 
systems, communications systems, ventilation and smoke removal systems, sewage 
disposal, lighting systems, and industrial processes that, when stopped during any 
interruption of the normal electrical supply, could create hazards or hamper rescue 
and fire-fighting operations. 
x Optional Standby Systems. Those systems intended to supply power to public or 
private facilities or property where life safety does not depend on the performance of 
the system. Optional standby systems are intended to supply on-site generated power 
to selected loads either automatically or manually. Optional standby systems are 
typically installed to provide an alternate source of electric power for such facilities 
as industrial and commercial buildings, farms, and residences and to serve loads 
such as heating and refrigeration systems, data processing and communications 
systems, and industrial processes that, when stopped during any power outage, could 
cause discomfort, serious interruption of the process, damage to the product or 
process, and the like. 
Emergency and standby power systems are essential for continuous operation of critical facilities, such as 
hospitals and emergency operations centers. Emergency and standby power are also needed to mitigate 
cascading failures of transportation and 
infrastructure systems that depend on electric The USACE [2015] developed a tool called the 
power, including: communications networks, Emergency Power Facility Assessment Tool 
wastewater lift stations, wastewater treatment (EPFAT). The EPFAT allows public entities to input 
plants, water treatment plants, water distribution generator and bill of material requirements into an 
pumps, transportation fueling stations, traffic online database with the intention of expediting the 
signals, traffic monitoring systems, and railway support of temporary power installations after events. 
signals [ALA 2006]. Guidance exists as to what There are currently over 16,000 facilities in the 
database. 
size and type of systems could provide 
alternative power sources on the customer-side 
of the meter. The Emergency Power Facility Assessment Tool (EPFAT), described in the sidebar, is an 
example of a tool that can help owners of critical facilities remain up to date with the most recent 
guidance for generators.  
Considerations for safe and reliable operation of onsite emergency and standby power include: 
x Proper ventilation of combustion products and cooling system components 
x Availability of adequate uninterruptable power supply (UPS) to support critical systems until 
emergency or standby power comes on line 
x Ability to start emergency or standby power generation without power from the grid  
x Prioritization of power needs and proper sizing of generators and circuits to safely meet essential 
requirements 
x Installation of permanent quick-connect hookups to accept power from temporary generators  
x Ability to safely transfer back to the grid when primary power is restored 
144 
I  
Energy Systems  
National Fire Protection Association Standards 110 and 111 provide performance standards for 
Emergency and Standby Power Systems [NFPA 2013a] and Stored Electrical Energy Emergency and 
Standby Power Systems [NFPA 2013b], respectively. NPFA 110 recognizes two classification levels: 
critical to life and safety (Level 1) and less critical (Level 2). Level 1 applications include life safety 
illumination, fire detection and alarm systems, elevators, fire pumps, public safety communications 
systems, industrial processes where current interruption would produce serious life safety or health 
hazards, and essential ventilating and smoke removal systems. Level 2 applications include heating and 
refrigerating systems, other communications systems, other ventilating and smoke removal systems, 
sewage disposal, lighting, and industrial processes. 
Key considerations for having adequate fuel for emergency and standby power system include an on-site 
fuel supply to support essential power loads and a fuel that can be delivered by truck. Alternative fuel 
sources, such as solar arrays, can be considered for functions such as maintaining lighting for emergency 
exit paths, providing water pressure in buildings, or operating transportation signals or pumps at fueling 
stations [Andrews et al. 2013]. 
Diesel generators range from small mobile generators to larger permanently installed systems. Small 
generators can be easily deployed to power traffic signals, rail crossing signals, or critical circuits in 
residential or small commercial buildings, but they require frequent refueling, pose safety hazards to 
inexperienced operators, and may not be reliable if poorly maintained or used infrequently. Permanently 
installed generators have more substantial fuel capacities and may be safer to operate and more reliable if 
tested and maintained on a regular schedule. 
Following Hurricane Sandy, the State of New Jersey used FEMA HMGP funds to establish a Retail Fuel 
Station Energy Resiliency Program [NJOEM 2014]. Eligibility requirements for the program include: 
x Stations must be located within -mile of an identified evacuation route 
x Stations with gasoline storage capacity of 30,000 to 35,000 gallons were eligible for up to a 
$15,000 grant to purchase quick-connect technology or to offset a portion of the cost of 
purchasing a generator 
x Stations with gasoline storage capacity of more than 35,000 gallons were eligible for up to a 
$65,000 grant toward the purchase and installation of an onsite generator 
x Stations must sell both gasoline and diesel fuel (except in limited instances) 
The program requires a maintenance contract be in place for at least five years from the date of final 
approval of municipal building inspector.  
Combined Heat and Power (CHP) is a highly efficient method of providing uninterrupted power and 
thermal (heating or cooling) services to a host facility. CHP systems are typically powered by natural gas 
fueled turbines or reciprocating engines. Over a dozen case studies of successful CHP system 
performance during Hurricane Sandy and other recent large scale power outages have been documented 
by Hampson et al. [2013]. Key advantages of CHP systems over conventional diesel generators include 
better reliability, lower fuel costs, lower emissions, and the ability to address thermal demands in addition 
to power demands. Texas and Louisiana now require that all state and local government entities identify 
which government-owned buildings are critical in an emergency and that a feasibility study on CHP is 
conducted prior to constructing or extensively renovating a critical government facility. In New York, the 
State Energy Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA) and the State Office of Emergency 
Management have partnered to educate emergency managers about the benefits of CHP systems in 
emergency facilities; and the governor has announced a $20 million investment towards CHP projects, 
with added incentives for projects serving critical infrastructure, including facilities of refuge [Hampson 
et al. 2013]. 
145 
I  
Energy Systems  
The technologies described in this section are mature and widely deployed. All of these technologies may 
be employed and coupled with a sophisticated control system to support a microgrid.  
14.3. Performance Goals 
Table 14-3 presents an example performance goals table for the energy system that is to be filled in by the 
community and its stakeholders. Communities can use the example table to track desired (future) 
performance goals and anticipated (current) performance of existing infrastructure for the electric power 
system for hazard events. Performance goals in this Guide are defined as time to recovery of function 
after a hazard event. The desired performance goals for the energy system are indicated in stages, as the 
time to provide 30 %, 60 %, and 90 % of the desired functions to the community after a hazard event. 
Example performance goals for the fictional community of Riverbend, USA, are provided in Volume I to 
illustrate the 6-step planning process.  
Performance goals for the energy system should align with the broader community goals (see Step 3, 
Determine goals and objectives in Volume 1). Key stakeholders within the community, including owners, 
engineers, planners, regulators, codes and standards representatives, and representatives of other 
infrastructure systems (e.g., communication, transportation, and water and wastewater) should help 
develop or review the performance goals.  
There needs to be extensive collaboration when establishing the performance goals for energy systems, as 
most buildings and other infrastructure systems are strongly dependent on energy. For example, both 
overhead and underground distribution lines for power and communication systems are often within the 
right-of-way of roads and bridges. Water, gas, and wastewater utilities need power for pumps and 
treatment plants.  
Table 14-3 has examples of functional categories within the electric power infrastructure system 
(generation, transmission, and distribution) and specific support to community building clusters that 
provide services (see Chapter 4 in Volume I). Many communities do not have bulk generation plants 
within their jurisdiction, and receive power generated outside the community. Distributed generation 
refers to small distributed sources of energy, such as microgrids, solar power, and wind power. 
Transmission and distribution systems exist in all communities, and are the systems that may be damaged 
during a hazard event. These systems play a key role in community recovery by supporting recovery of 
building clusters, other infrastructure systems, and community needs.  
Recovery times are broken down into three main phases: short-term, intermediate, and long-term. The 
short term phase (0-3 days) supports immediate recovery of the community. The intermediate recovery 
phase (1-12 weeks) supports the return of individuals and businesses to their daily functions. The long 
term recovery phase (4-36+ months) supports the need to rebuild, retrofit, and strengthen the 
transportation network. 
Each community should identify and plan for prevailing hazards that may have significant negative 
impact on the built environment. When developing the performance goals, the community should 
evaluate three different event levels (routine, design, and extreme events) that were presented and 
discussed in Chapter 4 (Volume I). As a reference point, the design event is generally synonymous with 
hazard magnitudes or intensities defined by the building codes and standards. A full discussion of hazard 
types and levels is given in Chapter 4 (Volume I) and Chapter 12.  
146 
I  
Energy Systems  
Table 14-3: Example electrical energy infrastructure performance goals table to be filled out by 
community and its stakeholders  
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Any  30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine, Design, Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized, Community, Regional  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual, Moderate, Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Communications Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Power - Electric Utilities 
Community Owned or Operated Bulk Generation 
Generation Requiring Fuel Transport (Coal, Gas, 
          
Oil fired) 
In Place Fueled Generation (Hydro, solar, wind, 
          
wave, compressed air) 
Storage (Thermal, Chemical, Mechanical)           
Community Owned or Operated Distributed Generation 
Generation Requiring Fuel Transport (Coal, Gas, 
          
Oil fired) 
In Place Fueled Generation (Hydro, solar, wind, 
          
wave, compressed air) 
Storage (Thermal, Chemical, Mechanical)           
Transmission and Distribution (including Substations) 
Critical Facilities 
Hospitals, Police and Fire Stations / Emergency 
          
Operations Centers 
Debris / recycling centers/ Related lifeline 
          
systems 
Emergency Housing 
Public Shelters / Nursing Homes / Food 
          
Distribution Centers 
Emergency shelter for response / recovery 
          
workforce/ Key Commercial and Finance 
Housing/Neighborhood 
Essential city services facilities / schools / 
          
Medical offices 
Houses of worship/meditation/ exercise           
Buildings/space for social services (e.g., child 
          
services) and prosecution activities 
Community Recovery  
Commercial and industrial businesses / Non-
          
emergency city services 
Residential housing restoration           
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90 % restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
The affected area of a given hazard event, which often depends on the type and intensity of the hazard, 
helps define the area that may need resilience planning. The affected area indicates the extent of potential 
damage by the hazard event, including surrounding communities, which will impact the duration of the 
147 
I  
Energy Systems  
recovery process. The disruption level, on the other hand, is a general estimate of potential disruption to 
the existing transportation infrastructure system as a whole, and should be specified as minor, moderate, 
or severe.  
Community stakeholders, including representatives from the utility providers, need to work together to 
determine the functions needed during recovery and the performance goals tailored to their community 
needs and energy systems. This process will guide the resilience conversation between the users and 
providers and help to establish common vocabulary and expectations of system performance both in the 
current state and in the desired, future resilient community. 
Note that for energy systems, the local owner operator (e.g. investor owned electric utility (IOU), 
municipal electric utility, cooperative electric utility, gas utility) has responsibility for the prioritization of 
service restoration based on federal, state and local laws and regulations, as well as ensuring the safe, 
reliable operation of the power system. The local community and owner operators can develop restoration 
priorities outside of those required by regulation for safety and reliability.  
To develop performance goals for Table 14-3, community stakeholders should identify desired 
performance of the energy systems to support a community in a manner that is considered resilient. The 
desired (future) performance goals should be based on the needs of social institutions after a hazard event. 
The anticipated performance (i.e., the X) should be based on the expected performance of the existing 
infrastructure system, which may include data and response times from recent hazard events.  
As such, much of the current infrastructure and response efforts managed by larger utilities may meet the 
90 % restored metric identified and therefore the blue shaded box can be marked with the 90 % to show 
that they are overlapping. However, the target performance levels proposed may not currently be achieved 
by utilities and providers.  
Community performance goals cannot address the restoration of the generation or transmission 
capabilities when these infrastructure assets are heavily damaged by an event. For hazard events, it is 
generally expected that the grid will be able to respond and absorb some level of infrastructure failure. 
Short- and long-term solutions to disruptions, outages, and interruptions need to be part of the recovery 
planning process. The ability of the sub elements and functions to be operational soon after an event may 
be achieved through a variety of solutions, including deployment of distributed generation and microgrids 
on both utility and consumer sides of the meter. Restoration prioritization and solutions chosen to work 
around restoration time constraints are highly dependent on the nature of the event, level and location of 
the damage, geography, and electrical characteristics of the affected systems. Some may require capital 
investments, while others are operational responses that are labor and personnel dependent.  
The percentage of the electric power infrastructure the utilities can quickly restore will vary from 
community to community. The sub elements presented in the table are a representative set. Communities 
may have a greater or smaller number of elements and functions than depicted here. The local planning 
process should evaluate and establish the sub elements and functions that should have desired 
performance goals. 
As examples, previous work to establish performance goals can be found in the efforts undertaken by 
SPUR [SPUR 2009], the California Energy Assurance Planning [CaLEAP 2015] program, and the State 
of Oregon Resilience Plan [OSSPAC 2013].  
14.4. Regulatory Environment  
The electric utility and liquid fuel industries are highly regulated with the goals of keeping prices low, 
keeping delivery safe, and providing reliable, quality products to consumers. Regulation occurs at the 
federal and state levels. Regulations, codes, and standards can help improve new and existing 
infrastructure performance and recovery from hazard events, while addressing these societal goals. 
148 
I  
Energy Systems  
14.4.1. Federal  
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) is the U.S. national regulatory body responsible for 
interstate transmission of oil, natural gas, and electricity [FERC 2015]. They are also responsible for 
reviewing interstate gas pipeline proposals, licensing hydropower plants, and reviewing proposals for 
developing liquefied natural gas terminals. FERC regulates the interstate wholesale sales and transmission 
of electricity, reviews and makes decisions on utility mergers and acquisitions, monitors and investigates 
energy markets, and provides rulings on transmission siting applications. FERC has the authority to 
impose civil penalties and fines for non-compliance to regulatory rules. 
The Western Energy Crisis, the Enron scandal, and a historic East Coast blackout, led Congress to grant 
broad new authority to the FERC in 2005. A joint U.S.-Canada task force studied the causes and effects 
of the 2003 blackout and identified the need to make reliability standards mandatory and enforceable with 
penalties for noncompliance. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 [EPAct 2005] entrusted FERC with a new 
responsibility to oversee mandatory, enforceable reliability standards for the nations Bulk Power 
Systemthat is, the wholesale power grid. The business of reliability became not just a set of industry 
best practices; it became a matter of national policy importance.  
Through Section 215 of the Federal Power Act [1920], Congress authorized FERC to certify a national 
Electric Reliability Organization (ERO), which is the North American Electric Reliability Corporation 
(NERC). NERC is a non-profit entity whose mission is to ensure the reliability of the Bulk Power System 
in North America. NERC develops and enforces reliability standards and annually assess seasonal and 
long-term reliability, monitor the BPS through system awareness, and educate, train, and certify industry 
personnel. NERCs area of responsibility spans the continental , Canada, and the northern 
portion of Baja California, Mexico. NERC is subject to oversight by FERC and governmental authorities 
in Canada [NERC 2015b]. 
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), another federal regulator, is responsible for licensing and 
inspecting nuclear reactors, and providing regulations, guidelines, and best practices for their operation. 
They are also responsible for any nuclear fuel manufacturing oversight and for coordinating and 
participating in nuclear energy research and development. 
Each of the various state and federal authorities regulates different and overlapping aspects of the electric 
system. The requirements, standards and codes for each are lengthy, complex, evolving and are part of the 
process seeking refinements to facilitate reliability and resilience improvements. 
14.4.2. State  
Each state has a regulatory commission with responsibility to represent the electric power consumers in 
their jurisdiction. State commissions regulate retail electricity and gas, approve physical construction of 
infrastructure projects, rule on local distribution of electricity and gas, and provide general regulatory 
oversight of local utilities and gas distribution companies. The commission meets regularly with state 
utilities and conducts performance assessments. If performance metrics are not met, utilities may be 
punished or fined.  
Utilities and state public service commissions (PSC) work to balance regulations and rules governing 
utility roles and responsibilities. For instance, there is evolving regulation of rooftop solar systems and 
behind the meter load, and the ability of solar companies to sell power back to the utility. This is referred 
to as net metering and the rules vary from state to state. Utilities need to account for the additional 
operating costs associated with planning, maintaining, and operating the infrastructure system as well as 
ensuring that failure of one customers equipment does not cause other service disruptions. 
The rules and regulations are primarily administered by state PSCs and utilities, but the oversight roles of 
the regional Independent System Operators (ISOs) and the Regional Transmission Organizations (RTOs) 
149 
I  
Energy Systems  
are also important, particularly with respect to cost and reliability. The ISOs and RTOs have similar 
functions, though the RTOs have greater responsibility for the regional transmission network, as 
established by FERC. However, both the ISOs and RTOs operate regional electricity grids, administer the 
wholesale electricity markets, and provide reliability planning for the bulk electric system. Some of these 
systems such as the New York ISO (NYISO) are single state systems, and some are more regional such as 
the ISO New England (ISO-NE) system and the Southwest Power Pool (SPP). Due to the inter-
relatedness of the North American grid, the ISO/RTO systems may be international and include for 
example, the Alberta Electric System Operator. 
14.4.3. Local  
At the State and Local levels, codes and standards are adopted by the cities, municipalities, counties, other 
local government entities, state PSCs, PUCs, ISOs, and RTOs to govern design and construction of the 
infrastructure. There is a wide variation in the level of design guidance that is provided by the codes and 
standards adopted by these entities. While some have best-practices, others reference ANSI-approved, 
consensus codes and standards.  
14.5. Codes and Standards 
A variety of codes and standards are used in the electric power industry for the design and construction of 
generation, transmission, and distribution systems. While ASCE 7 is now incorporated by reference and 
used more frequently than in the past, most of the Transmission and Distribution assets are designed to 
the National Electric Safety Code (NESC) or the Rural Utilities Service (RUS) design manuals/standards, 
respectively. There are many variables related to design and construction of these assets. Not all elements 
may be addressed here or will require additional cross checking with additional codes, standards, and 
regulations. 
In 2009, NIST established the Smart Grid Interoperability Panel (SGIP). The SGIP is a private-public 
partnership that identifies electricity delivery standards gaps, fills the gaps through requirements analysis, 
and coordinates with Standards Setting Organizations (SSOs) to create or modify interoperability 
standards and guidelines. The SGIP maintains a Catalog of Standards (SGIP 2015) that lists many 
standards that have been vetted through a regimented process with regards to cybersecurity and 
architectural integrity. 
The National Electric Safety Code (NESC) is the electric code that is adhered to by the Investor-Owned 
Utilities (IOUs) who design and construct the Transmission assets; Sections 24 (Grades of Construction), 
25 (Loading Requirements) and 26 (Strength Requirements). NESC Rules 215 (grounding) and 218 
(trees) present information important to vegetation management. While this is a safety code, it is used as 
an engineering design code in lieu of other guidance. Each utility also has a standards department that 
evaluates the various codes and standards that are applied during design and construction of their assets. 
They evaluate any new equipment to ensure it meets or exceeds these standards. From the baseline set 
forth in the NESC, it is important to note that all IOUs have developed their own standards for their 
respective systems. While most of these standards exceed the minimums set forth by the NESC, 
performance desired for resilience may exceed the baseline set forth when considering hazards (e.g., 
flood, wind, seismic, ice, and other natural hazards and human-caused threats).  
In a similar fashion, the co-operatives and municipalities responsible for distribution assets use the design 
manuals and standards from the Rural Utilities Service (RUS). The RUS distribution line design manuals 
consist of RUS bulletins 1724-150 [USDA 2014] through 1724-154 [USDA 2003]. These refer to the 
identification of critical loads and customers and of poles and equipment.  
150 
I  
Energy Systems  
The information in the following sections is provided to help communities better develop their own 
performance goals for new construction by identifying performance criteria that have been considered in 
the design of these assets. 
14.5.1. New Construction 
For some elements of the energy system, the design criteria for hazards have been aligned with building 
standards, such as ASCE 7. However, performance goals for these systems are not well defined. 
Definitions are also less clear regarding what are considered routine, design, and extreme events.  
The following summarizes hazards considered by the NESC (Part 2, Section 25): 
x 250B  combined ice and wind  This is the basic loading criterion and is known as the District 
Loading. It incorporates both wind and ice with overload and strength factors. This applies to all 
structures and references the map presented in Figure 250-1 [IEEE 2012]. The boundaries of the 
districts follow county lines. Data were obtained from a small number of weather stations which 
were far apart. While the industry has discussed replacing this map with appropriate maps from 
ASCE 7, this issue is still being evaluated.  
x 250C  extreme wind  These criteria account for the higher winds typically found along the 
coastline and during extreme events. These criteria are only used for structures that are higher 
than 60 above ground (70 pole and longer [IEEE 2012]). Appropriate maps are Figures 250-2a 
through 250-2e [IEEE 2012]. Due to their typical tower height, transmission lines are designed to 
these criteria. The overload and strength factors used are generally 1 since this is an extreme 
event map (note, the nomenclature of extreme wind used here is not consistent with the extreme 
wind event used for the design and construction of buildings or storm shelters per the ICC-500 
[2014]). These criteria were first introduced into the NESC in 1977 [IEEE 2015]. The 2002 
NESC [IEEE 2002] incorporated the wind maps from ASCE 7-98. The 2012 NESC [IEEE 2012] 
uses the wind maps from ASCE 7-05. The ASCE 7-10 wind maps were revised to better represent 
the wind hazard for the range of design conditions required for buildings and structures. The 
maps now are based on new and updated modeling efforts, refinements to understanding of wind 
performance, and incorporation of risk and reliability factors into the maps for building Risk 
Categories (see Chapter 12). However, these maps are not used by the NESC based on a decision 
by their code committee to retain the use of the ASCE 7-05 wind maps and not update the NESC 
engineering coefficients for the new map assumptions. Currently, NESC is working with ASCE 
to determine how to incorporate the new maps being prepared for the 2016 update of ASCE 7.  
x 250D  combined ice and wind  This criterion was added in the 2007 NESC to account for 
extreme ice events [IEEE 2015]. This criterion is similar to the extreme wind load. Most 
transmission assets will be designed to this criterion while distribution assets will not. Over the 
years most utilities had their own extreme ice loading for the design of transmission assets. The 
maps from ASCE 7-05 have been retained and referenced for this criterion. 
x Additional Standards related to hazard-resistant design include: 
 ASCE 7-10 [ASCE 2010] exempts electrical lines from seismic design 
 ASCE 113 [ASCE 2008] applies design criteria for stations. Seismic design is addressed in 
this standard 
 ANSI O5 [ANSI 2008] applies to wood poles 
 ANSI C29 [ANSI 2013] applies to insulators 
151 
I  
Energy Systems  
Most distribution structures are shorter than the 18 m (60 ft) height limitation. Therefore, most utilities 
will not design their distribution lines to the ASCE 7 criteria. This criterion may need to be reconsidered 
given the performance of electric power systems during hurricanes and tornadoes. Utilities can consider 
additional design criteria beyond the required minimums to meet desired performance goals.  
14.5.1.1. Implied or Stated Performance Levels for Design Hazard Level 
As discussed in the previous section, structures greater than 18 m (60 ft) tall are designed for ASCE 7 
wind and ice hazards. Though the NESC defines this as an extreme loading case, these loads are 
consistent with the design event as defined in this Guide. Therefore, future energy infrastructure greater 
than 18 m (60 ft) tall should have very few failures in a design event. However, energy infrastructure less 
than 18 m (60 ft) tall (i.e., most distribution structures) is not required to be designed to the NESC 
extreme loads. Rather, they can be designed to Rule 250B criteria, which is less than a design event as 
defined in Chapter 4 (Volume I). Therefore, failures in the energy distribution system are more likely to 
occur in a design ice or wind event than for buildings and structures designed according to ASCE 7 
criteria. For instance, some failures in the distribution system may occur during routine wind or ice 
events, depending on the system design criteria relative to the event magnitude. Designing and 
constructing distribution system elements to standards used for buildings and other structures to which 
they provide service, as well as an effective tree-trimming program, would improve the performance of 
the distribution system when a hazard event does occur.  
Overhead structures and their supporting foundations that are designed to take into account local soil 
characteristics would be anticipated to perform well during earthquakes due to their flexibility. However, 
actual performance during a design earthquake event for these systems is not well characterized. Buried 
distribution lines may fail due to liquefaction or if there is not enough slack in the lines to resist the 
displacements and forces from design earthquake events. Flooding may also lead to failure of 
underground infrastructure, if not adequately designed for inundation or protected from scour or 
landslides. 
14.5.1.2. Recovery Levels 
The time to recover and restore service of energy infrastructure less than 18 m (60 ft) in height will 
depend on a number of factors, such as whether distribution lines are overhead or underground, mobility 
of emergency repair crews, availability of resources for repair, and extent of the affected area. Overhead 
distribution lines may fail more frequently due to wind or ice events. However, these failures are easier to 
access and repair than underground lines, which may fail during flood or earthquake events.  
Underground infrastructure damage is more difficult to access and repair. Therefore, while overhead 
distribution infrastructure may have more widespread failures that will likely take days to weeks to 
recover, a few underground failures may result in the same recovery time. However, widespread 
underground failures may result in a number of weeks to restore full functionality of the system.  
14.5.2. Existing Construction 
For existing infrastructure elements of the energy system, the design criteria used for performance and 
hazards varies greatly. In many cases, little to no consideration was given to the forces and loads imparted 
to the infrastructure by hazard events because the design pre-dated design standards, such as ASCE 7 
[ASCE 2010], that provide criteria to calculate and apply such loads. In some instances, hazard resistance 
was incorporated through anecdotal information, such as siting of critical infrastructure based on past 
storms or through conservative design approaches and use of materials that provide some level of 
resilience. Further, performance goals for these systems were likely never considered or defined. As a 
152 
I  
Energy Systems  
result, older infrastructure may have vulnerabilities. This section discusses the anticipated or implied 
performance for existing infrastructure elements to help develop better estimates of anticipated 
performance during hazard events.  
Examples of these vulnerabilities may include: 
x Clustered, below grade transformers. Transformers tightly clustered in underground vaults and 
small substation yards, many at or below grade, often fill with water and debris during floods, 
mud slides, and earthquakes. System redundancy can mitigate the loss of service provided or time 
to restore service. 
x Single pole substation high and low voltage feeds. Using single poles to take both the incoming 
and outgoing lines from substations creates a potential single point of failure. If the lines are 
separated and the incoming high voltage pole or tower fails, distributed generation may still be 
able to feed the station. If a low side feeder exit pole fails, the incoming high voltage feed 
remains functional as do other low voltage feeder poles. 
x Fuses, not breakers in many locations. Using fuses rather than breakers or reclosers in different 
parts of a distribution system is largely a cost based decision. Using more breakers and reclosers 
may be a new best practice when considering resilience. Also, the lack of sectionalizers in many 
utility systems can mean that a single fault results in a loss of service to all customers while the 
damaged circuit is being repaired. 
x Underground ducts run close together and crossing in many shallow manholes. The proximity 
of many ducts is a potential common failure mode not generally considered in existing design 
practices. 
x Lack of automation. Most switching in the distribution grid today is local and manual, such that 
restoration of power using alternate configurations requires a person to physically access the gear. 
Vulnerabilities in existing communications and control equipment used to support the energy system may 
include: 
x Single communications card/frequency in devices. A single communication card or frequency 
can create a point of failure and potential interference issue with increased radio traffic during 
event response. 
x Single encryption key or default passwords for all devices in a system. Encryption and password 
issues are a well-known security issue being addressed in critical infrastructure, but this issue is 
not considered for most distribution systems. 
x Very small batteries and super capacitors in devices. Small energy storage devices have a short 
communications windows on a few channels which can progress to a number of dropped or 
missed communications during outages, limiting the ability to optimize crew dispatch. 
x Mesh networks performance on cold start. Some mesh network implementation plans being used 
for field area networks may be fragile when the system starts to have outages. It takes time to 
reform an implementation plan after an outage, and plans may be limited by small batteries, deep 
mesh designs, lack of stored cold start parameters, etc. 
x Common right of ways. Fiber and other communication circuits tend to run in the same rights of 
ways (on the same poles) as the electrical service  breaking one normally breaks both.  
x Telecommunications Route Diversity. Diversity of routes may not exist because of a small 
number of telecomm switches or central offices. 
153 
I  
Energy Systems  
x Cellular Communications Emergency Operating Practices. While cellular towers offer coverage 
in many locations, without adequate emergency or standby power, the towers revert to emergency 
calling only when the grid goes down, and can affect electric power communications that rely on 
cellular systems for backhaul. 
x Digital Phone System Powering Requirements. Unlike the Plain Old Telephone Service (POTS) 
system, digital phone systems require power at each street box.  
Most of these issues do not have explicit codes and regulations, but some do. Most come under the 
category of best practices on both the customer and utility sides of the meter. These vulnerabilities will 
remain until new construction (undertaken using new codes and best practices that consider resilience) 
replaces the older infrastructure. 
Some utilities on the east coast are starting to look at protection or mitigation of stations after Hurricane 
Sandy. Design or retrofit options might include elevating structures and control buildings above design 
flood levels, or relocating the station outside the flood zone. While NESC rules address vegetation 
management, there is a lack of best management practices to guide the industry. 
14.5.2.1. Implied or Stated Performance Levels for Design Hazard Level 
As discussed in Section 14.3, the 90 % desired performance goals may already be met by the anticipated 
performance of some electric utilities. For routine hazard events, most consumers of electricity and fuel 
expect restoration within minutes or hours, not days.  
Some existing utility infrastructure is up to 30 years in age, and most infrastructure systems 10 years or 
newer are highly dependent on communications and control networks to operate effectively in adverse 
conditions. This is especially true for those systems with some level of automation that permit automatic 
or remote controlled circuit switching, sectionalizing, and reconfiguration. The availability and 
operational state of field assets is also directly impacted by the availability of communications equipment. 
There are multiple failure modes for communications and control equipment. One that is addressed by 
codes and standards for new construction is the ability of electronic equipment to operate correctly in 
harsh environmental conditions. Early implementations of network gear in substations were based on 
consumer gear that had very low tolerance for temperature, humidity, shock, vibration, and the 
electromagnetic environment. Even first generation industrial quality gear intended for utility applications 
did not consider the environment found in substation and feeder applications. New standards, such IEC 
61850-3 [IEC 2013] and IEEE 1613 [IEEE 2009], address some of these issues. The IEC standard that is 
used around the world, but especially in Europe, has good environmental (temperature, shock, and 
vibration) guidelines, but the equivalent IEEE standard used primarily in North America does not. In 
North America there is presently no code or regulation that requires communications and control 
equipment to comply with any standard, and best practices are still emerging. Standards defined for 
communication facilities, as described in Chapter 15, do not apply to other industries or utilities who may 
implement or utilize similar equipment to support the functioning of their business. These systems may be 
vulnerable to communication and control failures until they are updated or replaced. 
14.5.2.2. Recovery Levels 
When events do occur and recovery efforts are required, the priorities and restoration efforts should 
address emergency-related societal needs first and progress through a tiered response. The example 
performance goals table lists the following tiers: critical facilities, emergency housing, housing and 
neighborhoods including essential services, and then the systematic restoration of the community at large. 
Factors that may affect time to recovery of function are listed below: 
154 
I  
Energy Systems  
x Emergency Facilities and Services Restoration. When planning for recovery of service, consider 
communication infrastructure that links critical emergency resources (wire line communications, 
cellular radio, and third party managed radio systems). Technologies and systems that address 
core emergency services should be properly planned, tested, maintained, and restored first. 
x Critical Rights of Way and Infrastructure Restoration. Recovery of systems functions depends 
on the ability to effectively dispatch and manage road and right of way clearing crews, electric 
repair crews, and other non-emergency yet vital restoration related organizations and services. 
Emergency power may be needed for utility crew dispatch centers, key city buildings such as city 
hall, public works crew facilities.  
x Community Restoration. Full restoration can require days, weeks, or even months depending on 
the type and level of hazard event. This aspect of restoration may be unplanned if the extent of 
damage has not been previously experienced. This element should be carefully prioritized and 
integrated into the plan for community resilience.  
x Mitigation Projects or Resiliency Efforts. Mitigation projects may constructed during recovery to 
improve energy system performance for future events, and may employ technologies such as 
backup generation, renewable energy, or microgrids.  
14.6. Strategies for Implementation of Plans for Community Resilience 
The objectives of this section are to provide guidance on how a community should work through the 
process of defining solutions to address the gaps in desired energy system performance following a 
hazard event. 
14.6.1. Available Guidance 
Energy assurance is a relatively new concept for energy system. Energy assurance addresses systems 
planning for normal operations and for effects from all hazards. It addresses energy delivery and 
reliability and the effects of aging infrastructure and effects of all hazards on the system. An energy 
assurance plan has elements similar to the Guides six-step planning process, although it does not focus 
on community performance goals as the organizing concept for design and recovery plans. 
Energy assurance focuses on assisting local governments to prepare for, respond to, recover from, and 
mitigate against potential emergencies that impact energy systems while minimizing economic loss and 
protecting public health and safety. For the purposes of this Guide, energy assurance is about:  
x Ensuring key assets are functional when needed 
x Fostering public-private partnerships before incidents happen 
x Gaining awareness of energy dependencies 
x Identifying actions and projects to move toward increased energy reliability and resilience 
Examples of how energy assurance has been applied can be found in the DOEs Energy Assurance 
program [DOE 2015], The NASEO State Energy Assurance Guidelines [NASEO 2009], and the 
California Local Energy Assurance Planning (CaLEAP) process http://www.caleap.org/ [CaLEAP 2015]. 
Energy assurance is about assuring that essential services are maintained in the event of an energy 
disruption. Key steps include: 
x Identify the key assets of the essential services in the community and determine their 
vulnerabilities 
155 
I  
Energy Systems  
x Build relationships and partnerships to clarify roles and responsibilities prior to events 
x Gain awareness and understanding of energy dependencies on other systems 
With a good understanding of the key assets and dependencies, a local government, working with the 
local energy provider, can identify actions and projects to become more energy resilient. 
Because resilience is new, there is a significant need for tools to help both the community and the 
industry assess resilience. The flowchart (Figure 14-3), developed by the CaLEAP program, illustrates the 
overall approach for developing such a plan including forming an EAP team. Notice that this flowchart is 
similar to the Guides six-step planning process (Volume I) to achieve community resilience, but there are 
some differences that will need to be addressed for compatibility with the six-step process being used by 
all building and infrastructure systems in a community. 
 
Figure 14-3: Energy assurance flowchart developed by CaLEAP [Source: CaLEAP 2015[ 
The length of time to restore electric service is a traditional metric of grid reliability. Similarly, the grids 
ability to ride through minor disturbances or avoid cascading outages is already considered within 
existing grid reliability metrics. While these metrics exist  such as System Average Interruption Duration 
Index (SAIDI), the Customer Average Interruption Duration Index (CAIDI), the System Average 
Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI), the Customer Average Interruption Frequency Index (CAIFI), and 
others  most reliability metrics are for normal operating conditions. The standards that define these 
indices specifically exclude major storms and events.  
Also, the metrics do not differentiate between customer types (residential, commercial, industrial) nor 
their relationship to critical functions (hospitals, police and fire facility, etc.). Communities and utility 
providers can use performance goals tables, such as those in Section 14.3, to set goals for recovery times 
during hazard events. However, these tables can also be used to determine the anticipated performance of 
the infrastructure (i.e., the X in the performance goals tables) for a given event. The community or 
utility can then define the resilience gaps (i.e., the difference between the 90 % and X in the performance 
goals tables) and prioritize solutions for enhancing the resilience of the energy infrastructure system.  
156 
I  
Energy Systems  
14.6.2. Solutions for Future Construction 
In general, when identifying equipment, and other components within the energy system, one of the 
qualifying criteria should focus on resiliency. When evaluating different vendors and system components, 
check their track records and references, and collaborate with others. 
Construction Solutions. There are several construction solutions that may help improve the resilience of 
energy infrastructure from hazard events include:  
x Strengthen and reinforce critical lines leading to population centers or other critical loads. For 
instance, adding reinforcements to lines that serve a hospital or fire station makes them more 
resilient to wind, ice, and branch loads. 
x Establish pole depth standards based on local soil conditions for pole heights. Ensure poles are 
planted to the correct depth and that the foundation will support the loads. 
x Determine capacity of poles for and do not overload poles with additional equipment. 
x Consider using NESC [IEEE 2012] Grade B construction standards for critical distribution lines. 
This grade of construction is commonly used in the utility industry and utility surveys show that 
using Grade B is a popular and effective construction solution. 
x Consider underground placement of lines and system components. There are definite pros and 
cons to underground placement. Underground systems are less vulnerable to weather, fire, and 
human-caused hazards, but not to flood or earthquake hazards. They are more expensive to 
construct and repair. For an event like Hurricane Sandy or the ice storms of 2012 and 2013, 
underground cables would have dramatically reduced the amount of damage and restoration 
times. For an earthquake in California, it could have the opposite effect in some locations.  
x Consider covered aerial medium-voltage (CAMV) systems. This hardware attaches to poles and 
overhead wires to add strength and stability to the wires. The added stability makes the 
distribution network more resilient to contact with trees and debris, and is especially useful in 
narrow rights of way with large concentrations of trees. 
x Provide redundant service to critical buildings, using local generation or an independent line.  
x Other potential solutions include various pole line configurations that can help minimize 
restoration efforts. 
x Consider elevating overhead equipment to reduce damage by wildfire.  
x In fire prone areas, consider using concrete, heavy steel, or other non-flammable and warp 
resistant materials and structures for overhead conductors and equipment. This improves 
performance of the poles and lines but they may need to be located further from the road rights-
of-way to reduce the likelihood of automobile impacts.  
Administrative Solutions. Some possible administrative solutions for improving the resilience of energy 
infrastructure from hazard events include the following:  
x Trim trees and other potential obstructions within the right of way. Comply with the NESC, FAC, 
and EPRI rules and guidance on vegetation management. 
x Use submersible equipment in underground substations.  
x Minimize the number of splices in conductors and in ducts that carry the splices. Where possible, 
position splices in conductors and ducts as far away from water mains as possible and in easily 
accessible locations. Note: in high volume rain areas, storm drains can be as significant an issue 
as water mains. 
157 
I  
Energy Systems  
x Consider heavy wall insulation cables (e.g., type TC cables and type MC cables). Heavy wall 
insulation cables are more resistant to physical damage and moisture and provide better resilience 
to severe weather conditions.  
Electrical Infrastructure in Buildings. Specific to energy infrastructure in buildings, the National 
Institute of Building Sciences [NIBS 2015] recommends that during the facility design or retrofit process, 
building projects have a comprehensive, integrated perspective that seeks to minimize the amount of 
energy that must be supplied and provides control methods that can more readily allocate the available 
supply as appropriate for a buildings required mode of operation at any given point in time. The CaLEAP 
[2015] organization identified additional recommendations for building and retail owners to facilitate a 
high degree of local, intelligent energy management that can take advantage of distributed resources, 
including: 
x Ensuring emergency, life safety, high priority, and general building circuits are well segregated in 
building wiring design and breaker panel layouts 
x Ensuring building automation systems take advantage of segregated load grouping mentioned 
above, are standards based (e.g. BACNet), and are capable of accepting utility load control 
signals (e.g. OpenADR) 
x Key community facilities necessary to ensure socio-economic continuity without internal backup 
generation capability are configured to permit easy, safe connection to external mobile generation 
(e.g. through standardized connectors at the outside service entrance) 
14.6.3. Solutions for Existing Construction 
Most ideas for new construction may also apply to existing construction solutions. However, in new 
construction, there is a larger set of opportunities for energy efficiency and resilience.  
In general, when replacing equipment and other components within the energy system, each component 
should be considered and, where better choices are available, communities and owner operators should 
make improvements when practical.  
Construction Solutions. The following solution may be useful to enhance the resilience of existing 
infrastructure systems: 
x Design retrofits for design hazard events by applying design and construction standards that exist 
but may not have been adopted within the utility industry 
x Strengthen and reinforce critical lines leading to population centers or other critical loads 
x Perform loading assessment to ensure that the pole is not over-stressed when adding new 
equipment to poles 
x Consider covered aerial medium-voltage (CAMV) systems 
x Consider replacing overhead lines with underground systems 
x Consider elevating overhead equipment to reduce damage by wildfire 
x Provide redundant service to critical buildings, using local generation or an independent line 
x Make sure the soil types and insulation properties of the soils are known when burying a line. 
x Perform regular pole inspections for excessive loads, corrosion or decay, and pole and foundation 
stability. If there is erosion around the footing or the pole is leaning, add guy wires or 
reset/replace the pole 
158 
I  
Energy Systems  
x Consider heavy wall insulation cables, type TC cables, and type MC cables. Proper grounding 
and inspections of grounding equipment greatly minimizes the possibility for transformer fires 
from lightning 
x Install and maintain lightning arrestors or other equipment in the distribution grid to minimize the 
area that a single lightning strike can affect 
x Retrofit existing construction, on the customer side of the meter, with external generation support 
connectors. If an existing facility is considering adding any form of self-generation systems, 
consider upgrading building circuits at the same time to segregate load types 
x Consider using the USACE Emergency Power Facility Assessment Tool (EPFAT), which allows 
public entities to input generator and bill of material requirements to expedite temporary power 
installation support services 
Administrative Solutions. In many cases, improving the resilience of existing infrastructure may be more 
easily accomplished through administrative solutions. Some possible administrative solutions for 
improving the resilience of existing energy infrastructure include:  
x Trim trees and other potential obstructions within the right of way 
x Perform regular line inspections 
x Inspect underground splices and equipment on a scheduled basis to make sure seals and the 
waterproof capability of the connections are intact 
x Have an adequate stock of spares (poles, transformers, line, etc.) on hand for fire prone areas, and 
do not use them for routine work.  
x If possible, cut off power before a wildfire reaches the line. This allows equipment and lines time 
to cool and may save the system from further damage. If people have been evacuated, turn off 
power before the fire reaches the area and allow equipment to cool. This proactive action can also 
prevent fires starting if a power line falls or equipment overheats. 
x Establish mutual aid agreements. The Edison Electric Institute (EEI) and its members have 
implemented a voluntary mutual assistance program for Investor Owned Utilities (IOUs) that 
allows utilities to request and coordinate support from others in their region not affected by a 
major event [EEI 2014]. 
The American Public Power Association (APPA) has a similar mutual aid process to facilitate regional 
coordination. Like EEI, the APPA has defined procedures for coordinating mutual aid [APPA 2015]. 
Rural Electric Cooperatives are also included in this mutual aid process through an agreement between 
the APPA and the National Rural Electric Cooperative Association [NRECA 2015]. 
Although processes exist among utilities to provide mutual aid, the relationships between local 
communities and other agencies involved in recovery are not always as well defined. Local resilience 
planning groups can coordinate with their local utility and become aware of the mutual aid processes in 
their region so that realistic estimates of resources and restoration time can be made. 
14.7. References 
American Lifelines Alliance (ALA 2005) Draft Guideline for Assessing the Performance of Oil and 
Natural Gas Pipeline Systems in Natural Hazard and Human Threat Events, American Lifelines 
Alliance(ALA), Washington, DC, 
http://www.americanlifelinesalliance.com/pdf/PipeguideFinalPosted061705.pdf. 
159 
I  
Energy Systems  
American Lifelines Alliance (ALA 2006) Power Systems, Water, Transportation and Communications 
Lifeline Interdependencies, American Lifelines Alliance (ALA) draft report to the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) and the National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS), Washington, DC, 
March, 
http://www.cimap.vt.edu/sites/www.cimap.vt.edu/files/docs/ALA%20Lifeline%20Report%20Final%20D
raft%20030606.pdf. 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI 2008) ANSI O5.1: Wood Poles  Specifications and 
Dimensions, American National Standards Institute (ANSI), New York, NY. 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI 2013) ANSI C29.1: Test Methods for Electrical Power 
Insulators, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) National Electric Manufacturers Association 
(NEMA), Rosslyn, VA. 
American Public Power Association (APPA 2015) Public Powers Mutual Aid Network: Electric Utilities 
Helping One another for Disaster Response and Recovery, Arlington, VA, http://appanet.files.cms-
plus.com/PDFs/Mutual%20Aid%20Playbook%20Executive%20Summary.pdf. Viewed April 20, 2015. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 1998) ASCE 7-98: Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
and Other Structures, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), Reston, VA. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2005) ASCE 7-05: Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
and Other Structures, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), Reston, VA. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2008) ASCE Manual 113: Substation Structure Design 
Guide, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), Reston, VA. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2010) ASCE 7-10: Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
and Other Structures, Second Edition, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural 
Engineering Institute (SEI), Reston, VA. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2013) 2013 Report Card for America's Infrastructure, 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), Reston, VA, http://www.infrastructurereportcard.org/. 
Andrews, E.; M.A. Lazurus; and J. Aliberti (2013) Community Resilience: Reliable Back-up Power, Saint 
Louis University Center for Sustainability, 2013 SDRC. 
https://www.slu.edu/Documents/sustainability/SDRC/2013 SDRC 
Presentations/2013_SDRC_Aliberti_John.pptx. 
California Local Energy Assurance Planning (CaLEAP 2015) http://www.caleap.org/. Viewed April 19, 
2015.  
Clark, Tony and Robin Z. Meidhof (2013) Ensuring Reliability and a Fair Energy Marketplace, Energy 
Innovation Series and Sixth Annual Schultz Lecture, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, October 22, 
2013, https://www.ferc.gov/media/statements-speeches/clark/2014/07-02-14-clark.pdf. 
Department of Energy (DOE 2013) Comparing the Impacts of Northeast Hurricanes on Energy 
Infrastructure,  Department of Energy (DOE), Washington, DC. 
Department of Energy (DOE 2015) Energy Assurance,  Department of Energy (DOE), 
Washington, DC, http://energy.gov/oe/services/energy-assurance. Viewed April 19, 2015. 
Edison Electrical Institute (EEI 2014) Understanding the Electric Power Industrys Response and 
Restoration Process, Edison Electrical Institute (EEI), Washington, DC. 
Edison Electrical Institute (EEI 2015) Transmission Projects: At a Glance, Edison Electrical Institute 
(EEI), Washington, DC. 
160 
I  
Energy Systems  
Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI 2013) Enhancing Distribution Resiliency: Opportunities for 
Applying Innovative Technologies, Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), Palo Alto, CA. 
Energy Policy Act (EPAct 2005) Energy Policy Act of 2005, 109th Congress, Washington, DC. 
Executive Office of the President (EOP 2013) Economic Benefits of Increasing Electric Grid Resilience 
to Weather Outages, Executive Office of the President, Washington, DC. 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC 2011) Order 1000: Transmission Planning and Cost 
Allocation by Transmission Owning and Operating Public Utilities, Federal Energy Regulatory 
Commission (FERC), Washington, DC, http://www.ferc.gov/industries/electric/indus-act/trans-plan.asp.  
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC 2013) Tree Trimming & Vegetation Management, 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), Washington, DC, 
http://www.ferc.gov/industries/electric/indus-act/reliability/vegetation-mgt.asp. Viewed April 20, 2015. 
FERC. 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC 2015) FERC - Federal Energy Regulatory Commission: 
What FERC Does, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), Washington, DC, 
http://www.ferc.gov/about/ferc-does.asp. Viewed April 8, 2015. 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and North American Electric Reliability Corporation 
(FERC/NERC 2011) Report on Outages and Curtailments During the Southwest Cold Weather Event of 
February 1-5, 2011: Causes and Recommendations, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and 
North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC), Washington, DC, 
https://www.ferc.gov/legal/staff-reports/08-16-11-report.pdf. 
Federal Power Act (1920) Federal Power Act: The Act of June 10, 1920, Chapter 285, 
https://legcounsel.house.gov/Comps/Federal%20Power%20Act.pdf. 
Florida Public Service Commission (2007) Report to the Legislature on Enhancing the Reliability of 
Floridas Distribution and Transmission Grids During Extreme Weather, Florida Public Service 
Commission, FL, http://www.psc.state.fl.us/publications/pdf/electricgas/stormhardening2007.pdf. 
Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Energy Association (2014) Resiliency of Stationary Fuel Cells and the Natural 
Gas Grid, WBDG: a Program of the National Institute of Building Sciences, Washington, DC. 
Hampson, A.; T. Bourgeois; G. Dillingham; and I. Panzarella (2013) Combined Heat and Power: 
Enabling Resilient Energy Infrastructure for Critical Facilities, ONRL/TM-2013/100, Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory (ORNL). 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE 1995) Recommended Practice for Emergency and 
Standby Power Systems for Industrial and Commercial Applications, IEEE Std, 446-1995. 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE 2002) National Electrical Safety Code, IEEE, New 
York, NY. 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE 2009) IEEE Standards 1613, Standard 
Environmental and Testing Requirements for Communications Networking Devices Installed in Electric 
Power Substations, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), New York, NY.  
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE 2012) National Electrical Safety Code, Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), New York, NY.  
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE 2015) History of the National Electrical Safety 
Code ANSI C2, http://standards.ieee.org/about/nesc/100/. Viewed January 26, 2015.  
International Code Council (ICC 2014) ICC 2014: Standard for the Design and Construction of Storm 
Shelters, International Code Council (ICC), Washington, DC. 
161 
I  
Energy Systems  
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC 2013) Communication Networks and Systems in 
Substations  Part 3: General Requirements, International Electrotechnical Commission. Geneva, 
Switzerland. 
Keogh, Miles and Cody, Christina (2013) Resilience in Regulated Utilities, National Association of 
Regulatory Utility Commissioners (NARUC) Grants and Research Department, with support from the 
 Department of Energy (DOE), November, 
http://www.naruc.org/Grants/Documents/Resilience%20in%20Regulated%20Utilities%20ONLINE%201
1_12.pdf. 
McDonough, P. W (2013) Post-Earthquake Checklist for Natural Gas Systems, American Society of 
Civil Engineers. 
Nadeau, J. P (2007) Improving the Resiliency of the Natural Gas Supply and Distribution Network, Naval 
Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, March, http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a467387.pdf. 
National Association of State Energy Officials (NASEO 2009) State Energy Assurance Guidelines, 
Version 3.1, National Association of State Energy Officials (NASEO), Arlington, VA. 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 2013a) NFPA 110: Standard for Emergency and Standby 
Power Systems, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Quincy, MA. 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 2013b) NFPA 111: Standard on Stored Electrical Energy 
Emergency and Standby Power Systems, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Quincy, MA. 
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 2014) NFPA 70: The National Electrical Code, National 
Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Quincy, MA. 
National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS 2015) Optimize Energy Use Whole Building Design 
Guide, WBDG: a Program of the National Institute of Building Sciences, National Institute of Building 
Sciences (NIBS), Washington, DC, http://www.wbdg.org/design/minimize_consumption.php. Viewed 
April 18, 2015. 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST 2014) NIST Special Publication 1108R2: NIST 
Framework and Roadmap for Smart Grid Interoperability Standards, Release 3.0, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, MD. 
National Rural Electric Cooperative Association (NRECA 2015) APPA/NRECA Mutual Aid Agreement, 
National Rural Electric Cooperative Association (NRECA), Arlington, VA, 
http://www.mpua.org/_lib/files/appa_fema_mutual_aid_agrmt.pdf. Viewed April 20, 2015. 
New Jersey Office of Emergency Management (NJOEM 2014) Retail Fuel Station Energy Resiliency 
Program, New Jersey Office of Emergency Management, http://www.ready.nj.gov/programs/retail-fuel-
station.html.  
NextEra Energy, Inc. (2013) FPL Inspects One-Millionth Pole as Part of Storm and Reliability 
Preparations, NextEra Energy, Inc., FL. 
North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC 2015a) Vegetation Management: Vegetation 
Management Grow-In Data, NERC: North American Electric Reliability Corporation, 
http://www.nerc.com/pa/RAPA/PA/Pages/VegetationManagement.aspx. Viewed April 20.  
North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC 2015b) NERC: North American Electric Reliability 
Corporation, http://www.nerc.com. Viewed April 8, 2015.  
Office of Governor Martin OMalley (2012) Weathering the Storm: Report of the Grid Resiliency Task 
Force, Office of Governor Martin OMalley,  
162 
I  
Energy Systems  
Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission (OSSPAC 2013) The Oregon Resilience Plan, 
Salem, Oregon. 
Pentland, William (2013) Rethinking Grid Resilience: Are we Gold Plating the Electric Grid? October 
11, http:/www.forbes.com/sites/williampentland/2013/10/18/rethinking-grid-resilience-are-we-gold-
plating-the-electric-grid/.  
PPD-21 (2013) Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-21, The White House, February 12, 2013, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/02/12/presidential-policy-directive-critical-
infrastructure-security-and-resil. 
PPD-8 (2011) Presidential Policy Directive, PPD-8  National Preparedness, The White House, March 
30, 2011, http://www.dhs.gov/presidential-policy-directive-8-national-preparedness. 
Public Service Enterprise Group (PSEG 2014) Resiliency Matters for an Energy Strong Future, New 
Jersey, https://www.pseg.com/info/media/advertorial/pdf/2013/resiliency.pdf. Viewed April 18, 2015. 
San Diego Union-Tribune (SDUT 2007) Power Lines Cited as Cause of Largest Wildfires. 
http://legacy.utsandiego.com/news/metro/20071116-1750-bn16cause2.html. Viewed July 27, 2013. 
Smart Grid Interoperability Panel (SGIP 2015) Catalog of Standards Quick Table, 
http://www.sgip.org/Catalog-of-Standards-Quick-Table.  
San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association (SPUR 2009) The Resilient City: What San 
Francisco Needs from its Seismic Mitigation Policies, San Francisco Planning and Urban Research 
Association (SPUR), San Francisco, CA. 
 Army Corps of Engineers (USACE 2015) Welcome to Emergency Power Facility 
Assessment Tool,  Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Fort Worth District, 
http://epfat.swf.usace.army.mil/. Viewed April 18, 2015) 
 Department of Agriculture (USDA 2003) Rural Utilities Services Bulletin 1724E-154: 
Distribution Conductor Clearances and Span Limitations,  Department of Agriculture 
(USDA), Washington, DC. 
 Department of Agriculture (USDA 2014) Rural Utilities Service Bulletin 1724E-150: 
Unguyed Distribution Poles  Strength Requirements,  Department of Agriculture (USDA), 
Washington, DC. 
 Energy Information Administration (EIA 2015) Drivers of U.S. Household Energy 
Consumption, 1980-2009,  Department of Energy (DOE), Washington, DC. 
 Energy Information Administration (USEIA 2009) Residential Energy Consumption 
Survey: Space Heating by Type of Housing Unit (HC6.1),  Energy Information 
Administration (USEIA), http://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/data/ 2009/index.cfm#undefined.  
 Energy Information Administration (USEIA 2014a) High cost, oil-fired generation crates 
potential for shift in Hawaiian electric sources,  Energy Information Administration 
(USEIA), http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=15091.  
 Energy Information Administration (USEIA 2014b) U.S. Percent Utilization of Refinery 
Operable Capacity,  Energy Information Administration (USEIA), 
http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=MOPUEUS2&f=A. 
163 
I  
Communication Systems  
15. Communication Systems 
Communication Systems Executive Summary 
Presidential Policy Directive-21 [2013] identifies energy and communications systems as uniquely 
critical due to the enabling functions they provide across all critical infrastructure sectors. 
Communications systems are continually evolving with rapid changes in technology, increased demand 
and consumer expectations, and increased dependencies on other infrastructure systems, most notably 
energy systems. 
Various means of two-way communication (wireline telephone, cellular/mobile systems, internet 
including VoIP) and one-way communication (cable, broadcast) are used daily and are often relied upon 
in the aftermath of a hazard event. During and after hazard events, the ability to contact emergency 
responders via 9-1-1 is critical. However, communication systems have experienced extended service 
disruptions due to failure of the physical infrastructure components supporting these services, or due to 
increased demand that exceeds the capacity of the infrastructure system.  
Communications infrastructure systems can fail in multiple ways, as was demonstrated by the events of 
Hurricane Sandy, the 2012 derecho in the National Capital Region, and the 2009 Kentucky ice storm. 
Physical damage, flooding or toppling of critical equipment, along with failure of other infrastructure 
systems (e.g., electric power, water, transportation) can result in cascading failures of communications 
infrastructure service disruptions. Ice, fallen trees, and debris can make transportation routes temporarily 
impassible, slowing repair crews from accessing inoperable cell sites and other components. Providing 
adequate standby power when external electric power is disrupted is one of the biggest challenges faced 
by service providers. Communities can work with service providers and other stakeholders to prioritize 
where service is needed most before a hazard event occurs. 
Communities should use this Guides six-step process to form a team of stakeholders that can establish 
and achieve performance goals for the communications infrastructure as part of a broader community 
resilience planning effort. Like the planning efforts for other infrastructure systems, stakeholders should 
include each service provider serving the community, local businesses, critical facility representatives, 
customers, and representatives from industries on which communications systems depend. 
This chapter supports the six-step resilience planning process by providing the following guidance to 
communities and their stakeholders to consider: 1) potential vulnerabilities to communications 
infrastructure, illustrated with examples of damage observed during past hazard events; 2) community 
performance goals for communications infrastructure; 3) anticipated performance of existing 
communications infrastructure and resilience gaps; and 4) mitigation and recovery solutions. 
Performance goals can be set for any community, type of hazard event, and hazard level. Once desired 
performance goals and anticipated system performance are determined, communities can work with their 
stakeholders to identify, prioritize, and close resilience gaps. For example, central offices, internet 
exchange points, and cell sites may be designed to resist hazards, or critical equipment may be located to 
reduce vulnerability to hazards.  
Communities can enhance public safety and communication for critical facilities with Governmental 
Emergency Telecommunications Service and/or Wireless Priority Service to obtain priority access after a 
hazard event when voice call user demand often exceeds capacity. Communities can also apply for the 
FCC mandated Telecommunications Service Priority to receive service restoration priority treatment 
when disruptions occur or to provide additional lines when needed. In the community resilience planning 
process, communities should work with their stakeholders, particularly service providers, to determine 
what mitigation and recovery strategies will be most effective so they can become more resilient and 
achieve their performance goals. 
164 
I  
Communication Systems  
15.1. Introduction 
Communication systems are integral to how our society functions, including broad societal reliance on 
mobile devices and the internet for communication. People use computers, smart phones, and tablets to 
read news and to watch movies and television shows. 
Communication systems play a critical role during and after a hazard event. The communitys citizens 
rely on communication systems (landline telephone, cellular/mobile systems, internet/VoIP, cable 
television, and broadcast) to be informed and to contact loved ones, schools, employers, businesses, 
health care providers, and emergency responders. In addition, government and other public agencies 
disseminate information to the public through one-way communication systems (broadcast and cable). 
Unfortunately, communications systems have failed in multiple ways in past hazard events. Physical 
damage to infrastructure and critical equipment, and failure of dependent infrastructure systems (e.g., 
electric power and transportation) have caused service disruptions. Increased user demand of 
communication services in the aftermath of hazard events can also result in service disruptions due to 
exceeding capacity of the existing system.  
To address the resilience of communications infrastructure, communities should use the Guides six-step 
process to form a team of stakeholders, including service providers, critical facilities representatives, local 
businesses, and interdependent system representatives.  
This chapter provides guidance to support the six-step resilience planning process on the following topics: 
1) potential vulnerabilities to communications infrastructure with examples of damage observed during 
past hazard events; 2) community performance goals for communications infrastructure; 3) anticipated 
performance of existing communications infrastructure and resilience gaps; and 4) mitigation and 
recovery solutions. Some solutions may include alternatives to existing communications methods that 
allow temporary measures to enable service while more permanent solutions are undertaken.  
An example of a performance goals table to be filled out by the community and its stakeholders is 
presented in Table 15-1 (page 180). The example is used to illustrate the process by which a community 
and its stakeholders can set performance goals, evaluate anticipated performance of their existing 
communication infrastructure systems, identify resilience gaps, and prioritize upgrades to improve 
resilience of the network. Though there are many options for improving resilience of the communications 
infrastructure system, communities should work directly with service providers to identify their priorities 
and determine the best solutions to achieve their performance goals.  
15.1.1. Social Needs and System Performance Goals 
As discussed in Chapter 10, the social needs of the community drive performance goals that are to be 
defined by each community and its stakeholders. Social needs of the community include those of 
individuals, businesses (both small/local and large/multi-national), industry, and government. For 
example, the banking system needs internet for financial transactions, transferring documents between 
businesses, and e-mail as a primary means of communication. When internet is not available, commerce 
is directly affected and economic output is reduced. 
Each community should define its performance goals in terms of the time it takes for its critical 
infrastructure to be restored following a hazard event for three levels of event: routine, design, and 
extreme, as defined in Chapter 4 (Volume I). 
The community has short (0-3 days), intermediate (1-12 weeks), and long-term (4-36+ months) recovery 
needs. Specific to communication systems, communities traditionally think about short term (0-3 days) 
recovery needs in terms of emergency response and management goals, which include: 
x Relaying emergency and safety information to the public 
165 
I  
Communication Systems  
x Coordinating recovery plans among first responders and community leaders 
x Communication between civilians and emergency responders via 9-1-1 
x Communication between family members and loved ones to check on each others safety 
x Continued operation of private emergency response networks that support community recovery 
Although reaching family members is a high priority, communities may agree to focus their social needs 
on critical facilities so family members can communicate with emergency responders via 9-1-1. However, 
when addressing resilience, communities should also think about the longer term and improve 
performance of the built environment wherever possible in preparation for the next hazard event. 
Intermediate (1-12 weeks) and long-term (4-36+ months) communications infrastructure needs of 
communities include: 
x The ability to communicate with employers, schools, and other aspects of individuals daily lives 
x Re-establishing data and voice communication operations of businesses, banks, etc., to resume 
commerce and serve clients 
x Restoring, retrofitting, and improving infrastructure components to avoid failing in the same way 
during future events (i.e., implement changes to make infrastructure more resilient). 
15.1.2. Availability, Reliability, and Resilience 
Availability and reliability are terms often used by industry when referring to communications networks.  
Availability refers to the amount or percentage of time a communications system is accessible for use. 
The best communications networks have 99.999 percent availability, which is referred to as five 9s 
availability [CPNI 2006]. This indicates a communications network would be unavailable for only 
approximately five minutes/year. Availability drives the communications industry and, thus, service 
providers continually invest to improve their systems. 
Reliability is the probability of successfully performing an intended function over a given time period 
[Department of the Army 2007], which is measured as the frequency of downtime. Though reliability and 
availability are related, they are different. A communications network may have a high availability with 
multiple short downtimes or failure during a year. Network reliability over that one year time period is 
reduced by disruptions in service (i.e., increased frequency of service failure).  
Resilience includes the ability of a system to prepare for anticipated hazards, adapt to changing 
conditions, and withstand and recover rapidly from disruptions. Recovery from a hazard event may 
include plans to rebuild infrastructure to improve performance. Consequently, by enhancing the resilience 
of communications infrastructure when rebuilding, network availability (amount of downtime) and 
network reliability (frequency of downtime) can be improved.  
Capacity of a communications network is the volume of calls, texts, and other transmissions that can be 
reliably transmitted. After hazard events, there is an increased demand on communication systems [Jrad et 
al. 2005 and 2006]. This level of demand can sometimes exceed the capacity of the system, resulting in 
blocked calls or website pages loading very slowly or not at all.  
Unfortunately, system capacity cannot be immediately increased for hazards. During or immediately after 
hazard events, cellular phones or internet services, for example, may not function properly due to a higher 
than normal volume of usage. This is especially true in densely populated areas, such as New York City, 
or around emergency shelters or evacuation areas.  
For example, the Superdome in New Orleans, LA was used as emergency shelter during Hurricane 
Katrina. Although this was an exceptionally large facility used for sporting and entertainment events, such 
166 
I  
Communication Systems  
facilities can be overwhelmed prior to, during, and after hazard events with an influx of civilians seeking 
shelter. This results in increased demand on the wireless network serving the facility. Therefore, 
emergency shelters may want to consider methods or means for providing supplemental communication 
capacity during hazard events. 
Alternate means of communication, such as two-way radios or satellite telephones, can be used by critical 
facilities operators and emergency response personnel immediately after a hazard event. Many first 
responders use these systems for this purpose. 
Historically, network availability and reliability of service have been a primary focus for communications 
providers. However, because of the increased multiuse functionality of mobile communications devices 
(e.g., cellular phones, smart devices and tablets), communications network resilience also needs to 
consider the capacity of both the data and voice networks. Additional network capacity is being added to 
support service growth for high-volume functions of mobile devices such as sharing photographs and 
watching videos or movies. Changes in consumer usage have challenged service providers ability to 
provide adequate network capacity during normal operating conditions, and demands after hazard events 
often challenge system capacity. Some 9-1-1 centers have the ability to receive photo submissions, which 
may require more capacity than a phone call. On the other hand, if 9-1-1 call centers can receive text 
messages, this may be a useful alternative in an emergency as text transmissions have a reduced demand 
on system capacity.  
15.1.3. Dependencies 
Chapter 11 provides information and examples on dependencies between and among infrastructure 
systems in a community. Specific to the communication systems, communities should consider the 
following dependencies on other infrastructure systems and dependencies of those systems on the 
communication network: 
Energy. The communication system is highly dependent on the energy system. For current technology 
services, loss of electric power typically results in loss of communications services, such as wireline 
(including internet), and cable communications, unless the service provider and end user have standby 
power. If cell towers have standby power, cellular phones will likely function until their battery drains in 
the absence of standby power (e.g., car charger, charging station) or until an external power source 
becomes available.  
It is not uncommon for distribution lines for communication and electric power services to be co-located 
(e.g., wires traveling along utility poles). Failure of these systems can occur simultaneously due to 
environmental factors such as a tree fall that severs both types of lines.  
In the wake of a hazard event where external power is lost, communications infrastructure and end users 
supporting critical services need sufficient redundant power sources to ensure continued functionality. 
Power sources may be needed for terminal equipment connected to communications systems. Air 
conditioning systems, de-watering pumps, power supplies, security systems, computer networking and 
SCADA systems all need to remain operational. For example, air conditioning systems, which keep 
critical equipment from overheating, are not typically connected to batteries. Critical communication 
equipment may become overheated and shut down if standby power is not available [Kwasinski 2009]. 
167 
I  
Communication Systems  
Transportation. Roadways and other parts of the 
transportation system needed during the recovery of 
infrastructure systems often become impassible after 
hazard events. Fallen trees and other debris resulting 
from high wind events (e.g., hurricanes and 
tornadoes), storm surge and flooding, and ice storms 
(see Figure 15-1) can prevent or inhibit emergency 
repair crews from reaching the areas with damaged 
communications infrastructure. Refueling of standby 
generators becomes more challenging when roads 
are impassible. When communities declare a state of 
emergency, the ability to transport equipment into 
the affected areas for restoration is an important  
consideration. Trip permitting, limiting weigh Figure 15-1: Trees fallen across roads due to 
station requirements, and working with neighboring ice storm in Kentucky slowed down recovery 
states not impacted by the hazard event can efforts [Source: Kentucky Public Service 
contribute to an improved recovery time.  Commission 2009]  
Transportation systems need communication 
systems to dispatch repair crews and monitor repair 
status during the recovery phase. Traffic signals and transportation hubs also rely on communications 
systems. Traffic signals may use communication systems for timing and synchronization of green lights 
to ensure safety and smooth flow of traffic. Transportation hubs may need to communicate schedules for 
inbound and outbound passenger traffic before or after a hazard event.  
Building/Facilities. Buildings and facilities  and their occupants  need communications systems to 
function properly. Communication systems in buildings may be used to run elevators, security systems, 
heating and lighting systems, sensors for lights, or other operational functions. Occupants rely on data 
systems within the building and telephone, internet, and e-mail services.  
In large urban centers, service providers often place antennas or cell towers on top of buildings. If the 
building is damaged or collapses, the tower may fail or service may be interrupted.  
Water and Wastewater. Water and wastewater utilities rely on SCADA communication systems to 
operate their systems, and use radios or wireless systems to communicate with staff and emergency 
workers in the recovery phase. If the communications network is down for an extended period of time 
following a hazard event, the recovery process can take longer since coordination may be slowed. 
Similar to energy, water may be needed for sprinklers and to cool systems in buildings that house critical 
equipment for communications systems. Water and wastewater systems are also needed for staff to work 
in those buildings that house critical communications equipment. 
15.2. Communication Infrastructure 
This section discusses communication system infrastructure for central offices (Section 15.2.1), wireline 
(Section 15.2.1), wireless (Section 15.2.2), cable and broadcasting systems (Section 15.2.3), and 
emergency communications (Section 15.2.4). Satellite communication is not addressed. 
Each subsection reviews key components, potential vulnerabilities, and mitigation solutions used in the 
past. Figure 15-2 presents an overview of the services and applications provided to customers by 
communications systems, and the core and access networks which support these services. The national 
communications infrastructure consists of many network components owned by different companies that 
provide diverse services, applications, routes, and connectivity to communication systems. The core 
network is the central part of a communication system that provides services to customers that are 
168 
I  
Communication Systems  
connected by an access network. Typically the term core network refers to the high capacity 
communication facilities that connect primary nodes. Core or backbone networks provides paths to 
exchange information between sub-networks. Access networks (i.e. broadcasting, cable, satellite, 
wireless, and wireline) connect the end customers to the core network. In some cases, communication 
may originate and terminate within an access network without connecting to the core network (e.g. local 
phone call within the wireline network). Multiple carriers operate distinct access networks across the 
nation using a variety of technologies. 
VoiceServices and ApplicationsData
x 
x x HTTPx GPS Navigation/
Local and Long VoIPVideox 
x EmailTracking/Timing
DistanceAir Traffic Controlx 
x x Linear and On-Demand x Text Messagingx Remote File )
FM/AM RadioIntermodalS
x Entertainment Programmingx Remote Transfer   AccessP
911/E911 x Satellite Radiox News and Information Trainingx Managed/Hosted/x File Transfer G
,
s
x Video ConferencingCloud Servicesx Web Hostinge
s
x YouTubex a
Social Networkingx Business Mgmtb
a
t
a
Core Network d
e
Internationale
r
f
tll-
no
e t
,
mB
eD
gI
a L
n,
.
ag
.
 Me
s (
ns
e
ios
ta
a
rb
a
et
pa
O D
m
e
t
s
y
 S
d
n
 a
g
n
li
a
n
ig
S
BroadcastingCableSatelliteWirelessWireline
Access Networks
 
Figure 15-2: Overview of services and applications supported by communication infrastructure systems 
(Source: [DHS 2008, Used with Permission] ) 
15.2.1. Core Infrastructure and Wireline System 
Communication systems depend on the distribution of electric power, which often is interrupted during 
and after a hazard. Hence, reliable standby power is critical to the continued functionality of the core 
network system and its end users.  
Except for conventional analog wireline telephones (i.e., not digital telephones), wireline telephone 
systems operate on a separate electric supply that may be impacted by the event, but service providers 
often use their own standby power to minimize disruption at end user locations. Hence, analog wireline 
telephones are generally a more resilient option for telephone communication if commercial power loss is 
the only impact from a disaster event.  
169 
I  
Communication Systems  
15.2.1.1. Central Offices and Internet Exchange Points (IXPs) 
Central offices, also known as telephone exchanges, are buildings that house equipment that direct and 
process telephone calls and data. These buildings serve as the core nodes of the communications system 
as a whole (see nodes in core network in Figure 15-2). Maintaining functionality of these facilities and 
their equipment is critical to timely recovery from an event.  
Internet Exchange Points (IXP) provide a way for members, including Internet Service Providers (ISPs), 
backbone providers, and content providers to connect their networks and exchange traffic directly [Kende 
and Hurpy 2012]. Similar in function to central offices, failure of IXPs can have a large impact on 
delivery of services by the wireline system. 
There are three primary resiliency concerns for central offices: 
x Performance of the structure 
x Interior placement and protection of critical equipment  
x Dependence on other services 
Performance of the Structure. The performance of central offices is extremely important for continued 
function of the communication system. For example, central offices in California may be designed for 
earthquakes events, whereas central offices on the east coast may be concerned with hurricane force 
winds and flooding, especially if it is located in a floodplain. Instead of providing redundancy of central 
offices, existing buildings could be retrofit to better resist anticipated hazards. In cases where central 
offices are located in older buildings, options may include improving the performance of the entire 
building, or only those sections of the building that contain critical communications equipment. 
The loss of an entire central office would directly impact a large section of the service providers network, 
particularly if no redundancy, backup, or restoration capability was built into the network of central 
offices. However, such capabilities are more routinely designed into modern networks for central offices. 
Since communities are ultimately responsible for updating, enforcing, and making amendments to 
building codes, it is important that current building codes be used in the design of new buildings for the 
communication network. Existing buildings can be evaluated and retrofitted or modified as needed to 
ensure the critical equipment within the structure is protected and can achieve performance goals 
established by the community. 
The importance of central offices in the communication network indicates that they should be considered 
for performance level A, safe and usable, or B, safe and usable during repair (see Chapter 12). As a frame 
of reference, central office buildings are classified as Risk Category III buildings for structural design in 
ASCE 7 [2010] due to their importance to the community operations. Performance levels and risk 
categories for buildings and associated design hazard levels (routine, design, extreme) are described in 
Chapter 12.  
It is important that the building envelope also perform as intended since failure of the roof, windows, or 
siding can allow significant amounts of water to enter the building and damage electrical equipment. 
Historically, few building envelopes perform well in design hazard events. 
Placement and Protection of Critical Equipment. Proper placement and protection of critical equipment 
from hazard loads and secondary effects are essential to maintaining functionality. Similar to the concepts 
that apply to central offices and IXPs, the following considerations should be given to the placement and 
protection of critical equipment to maintain functionality, including: 
x Electrical and emergency equipment should be located above the elevation of an extreme flood, 
which is to be defined by the community (see Chapter 4, Volume I).  
170 
I  
Communication Systems  
x Critical equipment should be designed and mounted such that shaking does not cause equipment 
failure or loss of function. 
x Critical equipment should be designed to resist extreme hazard loads anticipated to occur in the 
community. Fire often follows other hazard events.  
x Where possible, redundancy and standby power for critical equipment should be provided. 
Flooding produced by Hurricane Sandy exposed vulnerabilities in a central office. Generators and other 
critical electrical equipment located in multiple basement levels were inundated and failed due to flooding 
[FEMA 2013].  
If hazard events might occur before remediation or 
relocation plans can be implemented and standby 
power systems are at risk of failure, a community 
can develop more immediate plans for using 
portable units to bring facilities back online until 
electric power is restored. For example, Figure 15-3 
shows a portable generator unit used to replace 
basement generators that failed due to flooding after 
Hurricane Sandy [FEMA 2013]. 
Dependencies between Services. Dependencies play 
a big role in the overall performance of 
communications infrastructure, as discussed in 
Section 15.1.3 and Chapter 11.   
Central offices and IXPs rely on electric power for Figure 15-3: Large standby portable power unit 
critical equipment, electrical switchgear, and HVAC used when basement generators failed [Source: 
units. Although critical equipment is typically FEMA 2013] 
connected to backup batteries or standby generators, 
HVAC units may not be as they require substantial 
power to operate. However, when there is a loss of electric power, critical communications equipment can 
overheat and shut down as a result [Kwasinski 2009]. Water may also be needed to cool the electronic 
components of HVAC and other conditioning systems. 
The transportation system is needed to bring in generators and fuel, other supplies and equipment, and 
workers to restore the functionality of system. Consideration for short- and long-term staging of mobile 
support infrastructure such as generators, chillers, and trailered water, should be considered in the 
planning process so that accommodations can be made before a hazard event occurs. These 
accommodations may include facility connection and support requirements, such as fuel delivery. 
15.2.1.2. Distribution Systems 
Distribution systems have the following components and factors that affect continued functionality of the 
communication system: 
x First/last mile  
x Type of cable (copper wires, coaxial cables, fiber optic cables), overhead vs. underground wires 
x Distributed loop carrier remote terminals (DLC RTs)  
First/Last Mile. The first/last mile refers to the final leg of delivering services, via network cables, 
from a service provider to a customer. The use of the term first mile indicates the first leg of cables 
carrying data from the customer to the world (e.g., downloading websites or uploading data onto the 
171 
I  
Communication Systems  
internet); whereas last mile implies the last leg of network cables delivering service to a customer. 
Although the name implies it is one mile long, this is not always the case, especially in rural communities 
where it may be much longer [WV Broadband 2013]. The first/last mile is where most failures occur due 
to the increased exposure to hazards as compared with individual buildings housing critical equipment for 
the communication system. 
Path diversity can be built into the system with nodes that connect to the network backbone. However, if 
the first/last mile does not connect to the network backbone, it is vulnerable to single-point failures. 
Furthermore, a node failure may also impact service. If a failed node is between a central office and the 
building it services (i.e., first/last mile), those customers will be out of service. 
There is likely to be less redundancy in the communication systems for rural communities. Historically, 
rural communities have not used these communication services as frequently or relied as heavily on them 
as suburban and urban communities. There have been two reasons for this: 
x In the past, feasible technology methods to send large amounts of data over a long distance had 
not been available 
x The economic investment required for service providers to expand into remote communities has 
been too high, resulting in a low benefit-cost ratio 
As a result of the lack of redundancy in rural and remote communities, a failure of a single node may 
result in an outage that affects most, or all, of the community. Therefore, it may not be economically 
practical for rural communities to establish the same communications performance goals as urban 
communities. As communications technology continues to develop, the level of redundancy (or path 
diversity) in communications infrastructure delivering services to rural communities may improve. In the 
case where the reason for the loss of telecommunication services was a direct result of a loss of external 
power, however, restoration of services may be quicker for rural communities because, in densely 
populated areas, power generation and distribution components tend to be packed together tightly and 
other systems often need to be repaired before one is able access to the power supply. 
Types of Cable for Last/First Mile. There are three types of cables typically used communication 
distribution systems: 
Copper Wires. Copper wires work by transmitting signals through electric pulses and carry the low power 
needed to operate a traditional wireline telephone. The service provider that owns the wire provides the 
power rather than an electric company. Therefore, the use of traditional analog (i.e., plain old telephone 
service or POTS) wirelines that use copper wire lessens the dependency on external power [ALA 2006]. 
As a result, when there is loss of electric power, communication may still be possible through analog 
wirelines (though this is not guaranteed) when the handset is physically connected to the telephone unit 
(not a wireless portable phone). However, copper wire has some drawbacks, such as being susceptible to 
saltwater flooding [City of New York 2013]. Service providers are retiring their copper wires due to high 
cost of maintenance and their limited ability to support todays high capacity/speed services [Lower 
Manhattan Telecommunications Users Working Group 2002]. For example, Verizon reported its 
operating expenses have been reduced by approximately 70 percent in areas where it installed its FiOS 
(fiber optic) network and retired its copper plant in central offices [FTTH Council 2013]. 
Coaxial Cables. Coaxial cable is a more modern material that is commonly used for distribution systems. 
It offers more resistance to water and is, therefore, not as susceptible to flood damage as copper wires. 
After Hurricane Sandy, coaxial wires generally performed well with failures typically associated with loss 
of electrical power to equipment to which they were connected [City of New York 2013]. Coaxial cable is 
primarily used for cable television and internet services. This technology relies more heavily on power 
provided by a power utility instead of the communications provider. 
172 
I  
Communication Systems  
Fiber Optic Cables. Fiber optic cables are more resistant to water damage than either coaxial cable or 
copper wire [City of New York 2013]. Fiber optic cables are now commonly used to bundle home 
services (television, high-speed internet, and telephone) into one system. The use of fiber optic cables 
allows for transmission of large amounts of data on a single fiber. Similar to coaxial cable, this 
technology relies more heavily on power provided by a power utility instead of the communications 
provider. Consequently, during and after a natural hazard event where power is interrupted, wireline 
communications services using fiber optic cables would be lost without end user standby power 
equipment [ALA 2006].  
Overhead vs. Underground Wires. Distribution wire 
can be strung overhead using utility poles, or run 
underground. There are advantages and 
disadvantages for both options. Overhead wire 
failures are relatively easily located and repaired in 
the wake of a natural hazard event. However, their 
exposure makes them especially susceptible to high 
wind (e.g., hurricanes, tornadoes, derechos), falling 
debris, and ice hazards. In high wind events,  
overhead wires may fail due to wind effects on the Figure 15-4: Failure of CATV cable due to 
cables, pole failures, or when trees fall on the cables. wind effects  
Figure 15-4 shows an example of a failed cable 
television (CATV) line due to wind effects during 
Hurricane Katrina. 
Widespread failure of the overhead lines is common during high wind events and ice storms. Some 
improvement in performance can be achieved with trimming of trees and branches to reduce both the 
likelihood of branches falling on lines and falling trees. The electric utility or service provider that owns 
the poles performs the tree trimming, often sharing costs with other pole users. Chapter 13 discusses 
challenges associated with tree removal and trimming.  
Installing underground wires eliminates impacts from wind, ice, and tree fall, but underground wires may 
be more susceptible to flood, earthquake damage, and liquefaction. Communities in parts of the United 
States have debated converting their overhead wires to underground wires to eliminate the impacts from 
wind, ice, and tree fall. However, converting overhead to underground wires can be both challenging and 
expensive [City of Urbana Public Works Department 2001]. The main challenges and issues associated 
with converting overhead wires to underground wires were noted in the City of Urbanas Public Works 
Department Report [2001] as: 
x Shorter design life of the underground system 
x Lack of maintenance and repair accessibility of the underground facilities 
x Underground installation costs 
x Converting customer wiring to underground services  
The cost associated with maintaining a dedicated tree trimming program is significantly less than 
converting from overhead to underground wires because the effort includes removing the existing system, 
lost cost resulting from not using the existing system for its design life, underground installation costs, 
and rewiring each building to accommodate underground utilities [City of Urbana Public Works 
Department 2001]. However, factors other than cost also impact whether overhead or underground wires 
should be used, including permitting challenges, rights-of-way, and geology and terrain of the area. Since 
communications service providers and electric power utilities share much infrastructure, their common 
interests need to be considered to decide what is best for their distribution systems. 
173 
I  
Communication Systems  
Digital Loop Carrier Remote Terminals. Digital Loop Carrier Remote Terminals (DLC RTs) are nodes 
in the communications network that allow service to be distributed beyond the range of a given central 
office or exchange. Historically, copper wires provide service from a central office to customers within 
approximately 4 kilometers (2.5 miles) of that central office [Kwasinski et al. 2006]. The use of fiber 
optic cables and curbside DLC RTs can extend this range of service to approximately 10 km (6.2 miles) 
[Kwasinski et al. 2006]. Therefore, DLC RTs provide a possible last mile solution for service providers to 
reach customers farther from their existing central offices or exchanges without having to invest in the 
construction of additional central offices. 
DLC RTs can be used to rapidly replace smaller central offices or nodes, as was done after Hurricane 
Katrina when less capacity after the event was needed [Kwasinski 2011]. This can help limit downtime of 
the network, but appropriate planning is needed to ensure the DLC RTs do not fail after the next hazard 
event. Perhaps the two most important things for service providers to consider when implementing DLC 
RTs (and any communications infrastructure) are construction standards that limit vulnerability to hazards 
and that address standby power. 
A key lesson learned for DLC RTs from Hurricane 
Katrina was that nodes should be elevated in storm 
surge areas so they are not impacted in future hazard 
events [Kwasinski 2011]. A utility implemented this 
practice in New Orleans and the surrounding region 
after Hurricane Katrina. Figure 15-5 shows a DLC 
RT elevated on a platform. The building in the 
background of the figure was a small central office in 
which all equipment was damaged during Hurricane 
Katrina, but never replaced [Kwasinski 2011]. When 
the next set of storms (i.e., Hurricanes Gustav and 
Ike) passed through the region in 2008, many of the 
DLC RTs were not physically damaged by the storm 
surge. 
 
Like cell towers, DLC RTs need standby power to 
function when external power is disrupted (see Figure 15-5: Elevated DLC RT with natural 
Section 15.2.2.2). Standby power generators can gas standby generator installed after Hurricane 
either be installed permanently, or deployed after a Katrina 
disruption in service.  
Whether generators are permanent or temporarily deployed, the main challenge is ensuring they have 
enough fuel to provide a continuous power supply. This may include the need for refueling, depending on 
the length of the commercial power outage. However, there are challenges associated with both options. 
For example, waiting until after an event to deploy standby generators can be difficult for a number of 
reasons, such as: 
x Mobilizing a large number of standby generators may require significant labor support and 
logistics 
x Standby generators require refueling during extended outages, which is problematic if there is a 
lack of access to fuel 
x Transportation routes to reach nodes may be impassible due to fallen trees or other debris 
Permanent generators, in contrast, can be expensive to install and maintain for a large number of sites, 
and require periodic testing and maintenance to ensure they function when needed. Permanent generators 
should also be placed so that they are less vulnerable to the anticipated hazards (e.g., raised above 
anticipated flood levels). As an example, installing permanent standby generators and elevating the DLC 
174 
I  
Communication Systems  
RTs after Hurricane Katrina helped reduce communications outages during the 2008 hurricanes that 
struck the same region [Kwasinski 2011]. 
There are several fuel options for standby generators (see Chapter 13). Fuel may not be available 
immediately after a hazard event, which may make refueling challenging if electric power outages extend 
for a long period of time. Natural gas standby generators performed well during Hurricane Gustav 
[Kwasinski 2011]. However, natural gas generators may not be the best option for use as standby 
generators because natural gas distribution lines are often shut down prior to a hazard event to prevent fire 
and explosions.  
15.2.2. Wireless Systems 
The wireless telephone system has similar vulnerabilities to the wireline system. In addition, other 
possible failure points unique to the wireless network include the cell site (tower and electronics), Mobile 
Switching Centers (MSCs), and backhaul (transport) facilities. Backhaul facilities carry traffic from cell 
sites to MSCs. Loss of power can disable these facilities, resulting in failure of cell sites.  
Figure 15-2 (page 169) shows a schematic of how the wireless phone network fits within the 
communication network. At the base of a cell tower is cellular terminal equipment, network switching 
and routing equipment, and an interconnection to a voice and data network (also known as Cell Site 
Electronics) and standby power. Damage to any of the equipment at the base of the tower can impact the 
cell sites ability to operate. 
15.2.2.1. Mobile Switching Centers (MSCs) 
MSCs, similar to central offices and IXPs, are key components of the wireless network switching system. 
MSCs also serve an interfacing role with the wireline network so calls can be completed between the two 
systems. As such, MSCs should be designed to meet the same protections and performance goals as 
central offices and IXPs, including proper design of standby power.  
15.2.2.2. Cell Towers 
Cell tower function can be impacted by physical damage, loss of power, or loss of backhaul (i.e., 
transport) facilities. Cell towers may be considered for performance level A or B, as they typically 
support essential emergency equipment or are located at a central emergency hub. Consequently, the 
towers and equipment located at the base of the tower should not incur any damage during both routine 
and design events. 
Cell towers are typically designed to meet the criteria of TIA-222-G [2006]. Cell towers designed to meet 
the criteria of TIA-222-G should perform well in a design wind, ice, or earthquake event. However, older 
cell towers that have not been retrofitted or upgraded to meet TIA-222-G may not perform as well. 
Specifically, cell towers in earthquake-prone regions may have been designed and built without guidance 
on seismic effects. 
Physical Damage. When using these design standards, design magnitude earthquakes, high wind events, 
or flood events should not cause cell phone towers to collapse. This was not the case in Hurricane Katrina 
(2005) where cell phone towers were reported to have failed [DHS 2006] after being impacted by flood-
borne debris (e.g., large boats, etc.), which had momentum that likely well beyond a typical design flood 
impact. Failed towers can be replaced by temporary portable towers. Similarly, the January 2009 
Kentucky ice storm had cell phone tower failures due to the combination of ice accumulation and winds 
over 40 mph [Kentucky Public Service Commission 2009]. In the event that a tower incurs physical 
damage, it can be replaced by a temporary portable tower. 
175 
I  
Communication Systems  
Loss of External Power. Some cell towers are equipped with batteries designed to provide four to eight 
hours of standby power after loss of external power [City of New York 2013]. In the past, the FCC has 
attempted to mandate a minimum of eight hours of battery standby power, but the requirement was 
removed by the courts. However, adequate standby power based on community resilience plans should be 
considered for cell towers, particularly in areas that serve critical facilities. Installation of permanent 
generators can be impacted by numerous factors including building codes, space requirements, landlord 
negotiations and financial considerations. 
There is a general expectation by the public that the 9-1-1 emergency call system will remain functional 
during and after hazard events. Considering the observed performance of the electric grid during recent 
hurricanes (which produced wind speeds less than the nominal 50 to 100-year values as specified in 
ASCE 7 [ASCE 1993, 1995, 2002 and 2005]), the availability of commercial power may present the 
greatest challenge to continued functionality of communications systems during the design, or even 
routine event. Consequently, adequate standby power is critical to ensure functionality. Recent experience 
with hurricanes and other hazard events suggest that the standby power needs to last longer than the 
typical current practice of four to eight hours at cell sites, for these types of events [City of New York 
2013]. 
Permanently located diesel electric standby power may pose significant difficulties due to initial and 
ongoing maintenance costs. In the case of events such as hurricanes and major ice storms where advanced 
warning is available, portable generators can be staged and deployed before or after the storm. However, 
after regional hazard events occur, the demand often exceeds the availability of portable generators. When 
they are deployed, the portable generators usually require refueling about once per day. Permanent 
generators also require refueling, but the frequency depends on the capacities of the generators. In events 
where there is little to no warning, such as earthquakes and tornadoes, portable generators cannot be 
staged ahead of time. However, portable generators may be the best approach for rapid recovery of 
critical aspects of a systems functionality.  
In highly urbanized areas, such as New York City, cell towers are frequently located on top of buildings, 
preventing the placement of permanent diesel standby generators and making it difficult to supply power 
from portable generators because of impeded access. 
15.2.3. Cable and Broadcast Systems 
One-way communication systems, such as cable and broadcast systems, are needed to disseminate 
important information to the public using a one-to-many model, particularly before and after a hazard 
event. Broadcasting, in particular, can be used to provide information to the public when external power 
is lost and if the members of the community have battery-powered radio or television. In the case of the 
2012 derecho (see Section 15.2.4), public safety answering points (PSAP) worked with broadcasters to 
provide updates on 9-1-1 service disruptions to provide information on other ways to obtain emergency 
assistance [FCC 2013]. Cellular broadcasting is also being used to disseminate one-to-many information 
updates, which is especially helpful in unanticipated hazard events.  
The Emergency Alert System (EAS) uses broadcasting and cable to alert the public of important 
information during and after hazard events. EAS alerts may address events that impact the entire nation or 
only a small area affected by severe weather [FCC 2015b].  
Broadcast Towers. The main infrastructure for broadcasting is broadcast towers that transmit signals over 
air waves. These towers are designed following the same standard, TIA-222-G, as cell towers (see Section 
15.2.2.2). Existing towers that were designed to standards earlier than TIA-222-G, particularly in 
earthquake prone regions, should be reviewed to determine whether updates are needed to meet the latest 
standard. Broadcast towers face many of the same challenges as cell towers to maintain functionality 
during and after a hazard event, including ensuring critical equipment is not vulnerable to damage. 
176 
I  
Communication Systems  
Cable Head End Facilities. Cable head end facilities are typically located at a local cable TV office and 
provide cable TV and modem services to subscribers. These facilities serve a similar purpose to central 
offices, IXPs, and MSCs. Therefore, they should be designed to meet the same performance goals, 
including the proper design of the standby power system. 
Cable Television (CATV) 
Uninterruptible Power Supply 
(UPS). Much of the infrastructure for 
cable is similar to that of wireline 
telephones. In fact, many people 
receive wireline telephone, internet, 
and cable television through the same 
service provider. These services are 
bundled and distributed to the 
customers in a manner similar to 
wireline systems. UPS systems are 
used to inject power into the cable so 
cable services can be delivered to 
customers [Kwasinski et al. 2006]. 
UPS systems may be placed on a   
pedestal on the ground or on a utility 
pole. Like other critical equipment, it Figure 15-6: Placement of UPS systems is an important 
is important to place UPS systems to consideration for resilience and periodic maintenance. 
minimize their vulnerability to 
hazards [Kwasinski 2011]. Figure 
15-6 (left) shows two UPS systems after Hurricane Katrina. The unit mounted on a pedestal at ground 
level was destroyed due to storm surge; the unit mounted to a utility pole was not damaged. However, 
Figure 15-6 (right) also shows that placing UPS systems too high on utility poles can interfere with 
regular maintenance [Kwasinksi 2011]. Providing adequate standby power can be a challenge, 
particularly for a pole-mounted UPS, because the additional load may be more than the pole can 
withstand. 
15.2.4. Emergency Communications 
9-1-1 Services. The ability to call 9-1-1 for help in an emergency situation is critical on a daily basis and 
especially after a hazard event. Current 9-1-1 architecture typically uses wireline switching and routing 
capability of a service provider in the community to connect 9-1-1 call centers (known as Public Safety 
Answering Points or PSAPs) to people who need help, regardless of whether the call is made from a 
wireline or cellular phone [FCC 2013]. Therefore, wireline infrastructure failures of selective routers or 
End-Offices that service PSAPs, and resulting service disruptions, may more significantly impact 9-1-1 
service than individual wireless service outages. 
As seen in past hazard events, wireline infrastructure failure can result in lost 9-1-1 service. For example, 
the 2012 Derecho that impacted 11 states from the Ohio Valley to Mid-Atlantic and D.C. caused 
widespread loss of 9-1-1 services [FCC 2013]. The FCC [2013] report on the failures of the 
communications infrastructure showed that seventy-seven PSAPs across six states had some degree of 
lost service, and seventeen PSAPs in three states (Virginia, West Virginia, and Ohio) lost service 
completely, potentially impacting more than two million people.  
As discussed in Section 15.2.1, standby power is critical to ensure continued service when external power 
is lost. Unfortunately, standby power failures in Virginia central offices led to extended 9-1-1 service 
disruptions in northern Virginia. One central office lost external power and ran on battery power for 
177 
I  
Communication Systems  
approximately six hours until the batteries were exhausted. Although the battery backup system included 
standby generators, the system was configured to use two standby generators in tandem to provide the 
power required by the facility. When one generator failed to start, the other was overloaded and failed. 
The FCC [2013] found that the generator had also failed in routine testing prior to the derecho, and the 
problem should have been fixed then. The failure of the standby power system lasted eight hours. As a 
result, the central office and local 9-1-1 services experienced a service disruption for that time period 
[FCC 2013]. 
Service providers have learned from these events and are continuing to make improvements to the 9-1-1 
service system in the National Capital Region (NCR) as well as in other parts of the country. 
Additionally, the FCC has initiated an annual program to have service providers certify their diversity of 
circuit to PSAPs, diversity of telemetry links, and their minimum standby power requirements (e.g., 
duration, testing, and maintenance) for all locations servicing a PSAP or hosting a selective router. The 
certification requires that all network central office locations directly serving a PSAP have 24 hours 
backup power, along with a 72 hour requirement for those central office locations hosting selective 
routers. Communities can also take steps to improve the resilience of their 9-1-1 service by considering 
purchase of diverse circuits and redundancy in End-Offices serving PSAPs when possible.  
Other Emergency Communication. Communities should consider implementing the Integrated Public 
Alert and Warning System (IPAWS) to enhance public safety and update the public with important 
information in the immediate aftermath of a hazard event. The IPAWS includes several alerts systems, 
such as: 
x Wireless Emergency Alerts (WEA) used to broadcast alerts/warnings to cell phones and other 
mobile devices  
x Emergency Alert System (EAS) used to disseminate warnings via broadcast, cable, satellite, and 
wireline services 
x Private Entry Point (PEP) stations used for private or commercial radio broadcast stations that 
participate with FEMA to provide emergency alert and warning information to the public before, 
during, and after incidents and hazard events  
15.3. Performance Goals 
Although the goal of communities, infrastructure owners (e.g., service providers), and businesses is to 
have continued operation at all times, the time required to restore functionality after a hazard event will 
depend on the magnitude and type of event, levels of damage, and plans for community recovery and 
resilience. Performance goals for communication infrastructure systems will vary from community to 
community based upon their needs. Performance goals should be defined by the community and its 
stakeholders, as part of the six-step planning process described in Volume 1.  
Stakeholders. Following this Guides six-step process, communities can form a team of stakeholders to 
establish and achieve performance goals for the communications infrastructure as part of a broader 
community resilience planning effort. Like the planning efforts for other infrastructure systems, 
stakeholders need to establish performance goals for their communications systems and evaluate the 
current state of its infrastructure systems. The communications infrastructure has owners and stakeholders 
from multiple industries that have important perspectives to consider when establishing performance 
goals to improve resilience of the communication system and the community. Stakeholders may include 
each of the service providers, local businesses, critical facility representatives, and representatives from 
industries that depend on communications systems, such as electric utilities, liquid fuel providers, and 
transportation officials. 
178 
I  
Communication Systems  
The City of San Francisco provides an excellent example of what bringing stakeholders together can 
accomplish. San Francisco has a lifelines council [The Lifelines Council of the City and County of San 
Francisco 2014] that brings together stakeholders to get input regarding the current state of infrastructure 
systems and needed improvements. The lifelines council performs studies and provides recommendations 
as to where enhancements in infrastructure resilience and coordination are needed. Their work has led to 
additional redundancy being implemented into the communication network in the Bay Area. 
Performance Goals Table. Performance goals are defined in terms of how quickly the infrastructures 
functionality is recovered after a hazard event. Table 15-1 presents an example performance goals table 
that communities can fill out to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of their communication 
infrastructure systems and how they support community resilience. Considerations for setting 
performance goals for communication infrastructure systems are presented here.  
The performance tables can be used by any community for any type of hazard event and hazard level 
(routine, design and extreme). The disturbance criteria and restoration levels shown at the top of the table 
summarize the anticipated overall impact on the community. See Chapter 4 of Volume 1 for a more 
detailed discussion of the performance goal table and the process for establishing performance goals.   
The communications infrastructure has two major categories in Table 15-1: 1) core and communications 
buildings and 2) first/last mile distribution systems that support building clusters. The building clusters 
listed in the left column of the table are grouped as critical facilities, emergency housing, 
housing/neighborhoods, and community recovery (see Chapter 12). These groups are intended to reflect a 
typical sequence for recovery of function following a hazard event.  
Communities are constructed for prevailing hazards, so the design hazard level provides the foundation 
for resilience planning. Examining the response of buildings and infrastructure systems to multiple levels 
of a hazard (e.g., routine, design, and extreme) can provide insight about the integrated performance of 
buildings and infrastructure systems. For example, a system may not perform well at the routine level, 
especially older systems that are not well maintained. If the system has an important role in the 
community, its failure may trigger cascading effects in buildings or other systems. These types of 
dependencies may indicate that mitigation or retrofit options may be required to improve community 
functionality for routine events. 
The table provides a visual summary of desired (future) performance goals and anticipated (current) 
performance of the existing communication infrastructure systems based on social needs during recovery. 
Performance goals are established by the community and its stakeholders and expressed in terms of time 
to recovery of function, depending on the communitys social needs following a hazard event and the role 
of the communication infrastructure systems.  
The desired rate of recovery is indicated by percentages, 30 %, 60 %, and 90 %, to indicate how much of 
the supporting communication system for the cluster is recovered and functioning during the three 
recovery phases (short-term, intermediate, and long-term). Anticipated performance of the existing 
construction for each building cluster is estimated (at the 90 % level) for the selected hazard event and 
also recorded in the table. The difference between the desired 90 % restoration level and the anticipated 
90 % performance level indicates the gap that needs to be addressed to meet the community resilience 
objective.  
In Phase 1 of recovery, community functions may initially be restored at a minimum or interim level to 
support essential tasks that start the recovery process. For example, an emergency operations center 
(EOC) may have enough power, phones, and computers to continue critical operations, but not to 
maintain all functions.  
179 
I  
Communication Systems  
Table 15-1: Example communications infrastructure performance goals table to be filled out by 
community and its stakeholders 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Earthquake   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized  90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Communications Infrastructure Short-Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Core and Communications Buildings 
Communications Hub (e.g., Central Office, IXP, 
   
Data Centers, etc.)       
 
First/Last Mile 
Critical Facilities  
Hospitals           
Police and fire stations           
Emergency Operation Center           
Emergency Housing 
Residences           
Emergency responder housing           
Public Shelters           
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Essential city service facilities           
Schools           
Medical provider offices           
Retail           
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
Residences           
Neighborhood retail           
Offices and work places           
Non-emergency city services           
Businesses           
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90 % restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
It is important that communities work with service providers when developing performance goals to 
understand the level of service that can be anticipated (now and in the future) from communication 
networks. Communication hubs (e.g., central offices, IXPs, MSCs) may or may not be located in 
communities. Accordingly, their role in community resilience and the recovery sequence depends on 
whether such facilities are expected to be damaged during a hazard event, and whether there is 
redundancy within the communication system if such facilities are damaged. Similarly, plans for recovery 
of the first/last mile and communication functions across the community should be developed with 
service providers and affected stakeholders. The core and communication buildings may be split into 
different functional categories by national service providers. The core refers to the backbone of service 
provider networks and includes facilities that store customer data and information. For larger service 
180 
I  
Communication Systems  
providers, these facilities may have redundancy within an area so that a regional event, such as a 
hurricane or earthquake, cannot disrupt the entire network. Communications hubs, including central 
offices, IXPs, MSCs, and other centralized nodes, are regional nodes whose failure would result in 
widespread service disruptions. A community does not have control over the infrastructure of the service 
providers networks, so it is important for communities to be aware of the anticipated performance of 
these systems and any vulnerabilities that could affect delivery of services through the first/last mile of 
the distribution system. 
The first/last mile for wireline, internet, and cable is impacted by the performance of the distribution 
wires in a given hazard event. While wireless technology, such as cellular phones, operates using 
transmitted signals rather than physical infrastructure for distribution, backhaul facilities use wirelines to 
transmit signals between cell tower base stations and Mobile Switching Centers. Although all system 
components (e.g., underground cables, overhead cables) are not specifically included in the table, they 
should be considered when setting performance goals for the community or communication systems. 
Establishing Community Goals. Communities and service providers may have different goals and 
priorities for recovery of function following a hazard event. Communities with a resilience plan will have 
desired performance goals that address a planned sequence of recovery to minimize disruption to their 
economy and daily life. A service provider will have prioritized plans for recovery of their system 
functionality, including compliance with regulations, which may address several communities or a larger 
region. Therefore, communities and stakeholders need to understand the capabilities of the 
communications industry and the level of service that may be anticipated during and after a given hazard 
event.  
It is also important for communities and service providers to each communicate their performance and 
recovery expectations, acceptable risks, prioritization, and business continuity and functionality 
objectives. Discussions between communities and service providers may help identify impediments that 
can unintentionally slow down recovery, such as slow permitting processes. Identifying such barriers may 
allow service providers to clearly understand required coordination, what will be permitted, and how to 
work around potential barriers prior to an event.  
Completing Performance Goals Tables. Desired performance goals are established first for three levels 
of functionality. In Table 15-1, the orange shaded boxes indicate the desired time to reach 30 percent 
functionality of the component, yellow indicates the time frame in which 60 percent functionality is 
desired, and green indicates greater than 90 percent functionality. A goal is not set for 100 percent 
operability because it may take significantly longer to reach this target and may not be necessary for 
communities to return to their normal daily lives. Desired performance goals are independent of any 
hazard. For instance, 9-1-1 service in a community is desired to be continually available - how that might 
be accomplished depends on the prevailing hazards. 
Anticipated performance for existing infrastructure systems are determined for the selected hazard type 
and level, which is recorded at the top of the table. The anticipated performance of existing 
communication systems that support each building cluster is estimated at the 90 % recovery of function 
level and indicated by placing an X in the each row of the table. The performance of many components 
in the communication network, such as towers and buildings housing equipment are expected to perform 
according to their design criteria. Recent events, however, suggest that this is not always the case. 
The affected area for a given hazard is characterized as local, community, or regional, depending on the 
type and intensity of the hazard. For example, earthquakes and hurricanes may have large (i.e., regional) 
affected areas, whereas tornadoes may have relatively small (i.e., local) affected areas. The affected area 
helps a community consider the potential extent of infrastructure systems that may be damaged, which 
may impact the recovery process. The disruption level is a measure of the loss of functionality across the 
community based on the current state of the built environment, and is estimated as usual (minimal loss), 
moderate or severe. 
181 
I  
Communication Systems  
Evaluating Existing Communications Infrastructure and Closing Resilience Gaps. The performance 
goals table can help identify gaps between desired and anticipated performance. The difference between 
the anticipated 90 % performance (X) and the desired 90 % performance indicates a gap in community 
resilience.  
Once a community and its stakeholders identify resilience gaps, the gaps are prioritized relative to 
community goals. Solutions are developed by the community and stakeholders to address prioritized gaps. 
Section 15.6.1 discusses potential methods to evaluate the anticipated performance of existing 
communications infrastructure. Sections 15.6.2 and 15.6.3 provide mitigation and recovery solutions that 
can be used to achieve the performance goals set by the community or service provider. The solutions in 
these sections also recognize it will take time and money to invest in solutions for resilience, and provides 
possible long and short term solutions.  
Given recovery times for shelters, hospitals, police stations, and other critical facilities in a community, 
communities and service providers should work together so that the appropriate planning, engineering, 
and service agreements are crafted for the desired recovery times. Some solutions will be more expensive 
than others. For example, communities may need to add redundancy or diversity as part of their solution, 
while for others it may be sufficient to obtain Telecommunications Service Priority (TSP) prioritization 
on impacted circuits (see Section 15.6.3 for discussion of TSP). In some cases, a community may need to 
enact administrative strategies to ensure resiliency (e.g., right of ways, permitting of cell towers). 
Emergency Responder and Critical Facility Communication Systems. The example performance goals 
table includes distribution infrastructure to critical facilities such as hospitals, fire and police stations, and 
emergency operation centers. However, communication systems between emergency responders 
(fire/police/paramedics) are not listed, which have their own communications networks and devices. 
Community emergency response providers networks and devices need to remain functional during and 
after a hazard event (i.e., there should not be any downtime). After a hazard event, functionality of critical 
services communication networks is essential to coordinating response to people who are injured, and fire 
or other hazard suppression. Two-way radios may be one solution if other means of communication are 
not functional. However, fire, police, and paramedic radios are often not compatible with one another. 
Therefore, communities should consider how first responders can ensure that radios are compatible to 
help with coordination. Similarly, other critical facilities, such as hospitals and police stations, often have 
their own private communications systems that need to be operational after a hazard event to ensure that 
they can serve the community.  
15.4. Regulatory Environment 
There are multiple regulatory bodies at the various levels of government (federal, state, and local) that 
have authority over communication infrastructure systems. No single regulatory body oversees all 
communications infrastructure or is responsible for enforcing of all codes and standards. The rapidly 
evolving technologies over the past 30 years have led to changes in regulatory jurisdiction, which adds 
complexity to the regulatory environment. This section discusses regulatory bodies of communications 
infrastructure at the federal, state, and local levels. 
15.4.1. Federal  
The regulatory body of communication services and, thus, infrastructure is the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC). The FCC is a government agency that regulates interstate and international 
communications of telephone, cable, radio, and other forms of communication. It has jurisdiction over 
wireless, wireline, and internet (including VoIP).  
182 
I  
Communication Systems  
The FCC has an advisory group called the Communications Security, Reliability, and Interoperability 
Council (CSRIC) that promotes best practices as well as industry recommendations for improved 
reliability and resilience for many types of communications providers. The council performs studies of 
hazard events (e.g., Hurricane Katrina, 2012 Derecho), and recommends ways to improve preparedness, 
network reliability, and communication among first responders [Victory et. al 2006]. There are no 
requirements for recommended best practices to be adopted and enforced since they are not developed to 
the rigor of standards. However, the industry voluntarily considers implementing best practices under 
appropriate circumstances. Service providers use best practices to implement mitigation strategies 
applicable to their network, and effectively prioritize network resiliency improvements. Furthermore, 
implementing best practices enables service providers to remain competitive in business and improve the 
reputation of their brand. 
15.4.2. State 
State government agencies have authority over local wireline telephone service. Most commonly, the 
agency responsible for overseeing communications infrastructure at the state level is known as the Public 
Service Commission (PSC). However, other state agencies have jurisdiction over communications 
infrastructure as well. For example, s state Departments of Transportation (DOTs). State DOTs have 
jurisdiction over the right-of-way and, therefore, oversee construction of roads and highways where utility 
poles and wires are installed. Utility poles and wires are commonly placed within the right-of-way of 
roads, whether above ground or underground. The DOT has the ability to permit or deny planned paths of 
the utilities.  
State DOTs also have weight restrictions on vehicles to ensure the stability and safety of highway 
systems, particularly bridges. However, in the aftermath of a hazard event, weight restrictions can be a 
challenge for service providers because support from other states may include vehicles over the specified 
maximum weight. Communities can work with states and service providers in their planning efforts to 
resolve this challenge so bridges are not subjected to excessive vehicle loads, and service providers are 
able to plan routes for emergency repair crew support after hazard events. 
15.4.3. Local 
Local government has jurisdiction over the communication infrastructure through a number of agencies. 
The Department of Buildings (DOB), or its equivalent, is responsible for enforcing the local building 
code. The DOB regulates placement of electrical equipment, standby power, and fuel storage at critical 
communications facilities, such as central offices and IXPs [City of New York 2013].  
Large cities, such as New York City, Chicago, Los Angeles, and Seattle, have their own DOTs. These 
local DOTs oversee road construction and the associated right-of-way for utilities (including 
communications infrastructure). Many smaller municipalities have an Office of Transportation Planning, 
which serves a similar function.  
Local governments also regulate zoning policies and land use. Zoning policies can impact the 
performance of the communication infrastructure system because they can prohibit service providers from 
placing cell towers, standby generators, or distribution lines in locations that are needed to provide 
redundancy in their systems. Communities and service providers can work together to understand how 
zoning policies and other local regulation can impact resilience strategies and to resolve some of the 
conflicts that may currently exist. 
183 
I  
Communication Systems  
15.4.4. Overlapping Jurisdiction 
A number of regulatory bodies have jurisdiction over the various services provided in the complex 
bundling packages service providers now offer customers. For example, a bundled telephone, internet and 
cable package functions under the jurisdiction of both local (cable) and federal (internet and VoIP) 
agencies [City of New York 2013]. Furthermore, changing from traditional wirelines to VoIP shifts a 
customers services from regulation by state agencies to federal agencies. As technology continues to 
evolve, jurisdiction over services may continue to shift from one level of government to another. 
Following the current trend of more and more services becoming internet based, an increasing proportion 
of services may continue to move toward being under federal agency regulations. 
15.5. Codes and Standards  
Codes and standards are used by the communication industry to establish minimum acceptable criteria for 
design and construction. Many standards have been developed for communications infrastructure, such as 
those of the American National Standards Institute/Telecommunications Industry Association 
(ANSI/TIA) and Network Equipment Building Standards (NEBS). Table 15-2 shows the standards 
discussed in this chapter: TIA-222-G for cell and broadcast towers; ASCE 7 for communications 
buildings (central offices, IXPs, etc.); and NESC for distribution lines. 
Table 15-2: Example communication codes and standards discussed in this chapter 
Code/Standard Description  
TIA-222-G Structural Standards for Specifies loading and strength requirements for antennas and their 
Antennae Supporting Structures and supporting structures (e.g., cell and broadcast towers). [Erichsen 2014] 
Antennas 
ASCE 7-10 Minimum Design Loads Provides minimum loading criteria for buildings housing critical 
for Buildings and Other Structures communications equipment (i.e., communications buildings). Also 
provides loading criteria for towers. 
IEEE National Electrical Safety Code  Standard providing requirements for safe installation, 
(NESC) operation and maintenance of electrical power, standby power and 
communication systems (both overhead and underground wiring).  
15.5.1. New Construction 
The TIA-222-G standard [2006] is used for design of new cell and broadcast towers. This version of the 
TIA-222 standard includes the biggest set of changes since it was first developed in 1959 [TIA 2014],  
These major changes include: 
x Using limits state design rather than allowable stress design 
x Changing the design wind speeds from fastest-mile to 3-second gust, consistent with ASCE 7, 
and using the wind maps from ASCE 7 
x Addressing earthquake loading for the first time in the TIA-222 standard [Wahba 2003] 
Note that wind, ice, and storm surge are the predominant concerns for towers. However, earthquake 
loading was added so it could be addressed in highly seismic regions [Wahba 2003].  
184 
I  
Communication Systems  
New communications buildings (central offices, IXPs, etc.) should be designed to be consistent with 
ASCE 7-10 Risk Category III criteria and performance level A or B (see Chapter 12). Consequently, the 
design of equipment and standby power within communication buildings should be consistent with the 
building performance. At a minimum, buildings should be designed in accordance with ASCE load 
criteria for the prevailing hazards of the community, which may include flood, snow/ice, earthquake, and 
wind. Wind loading criteria used by ASCE 7-10 has been developed using hurricane and extratropical 
winds. Other natural hazards that can cause significant damage, such as wildfire, tsunami, and tornadoes, 
are not explicitly addressed in ASCE 7-10. However, as discussed in Chapter 12, fire protection standards 
are available and are used to mitigate potential building fire damage. 
Distribution lines for communication system are subject to the design criteria in the National Electric 
Safety Code (NESC). As discussed in Chapter 13, Rule 250 contains the hazard load criteria for 
communication and electric power lines as well as their supporting structures (e.g., utility poles). 
Specifically, these criteria address combined ice and wind loads for three districts of the  
defined as: 1) heavy; 2) medium; and 3) light, as defined in Rule 250B. Rule 250C addresses extreme 
wind loading and Rule 250D provides design criteria for extreme ice with concurrent wind.  
The definition of the term extreme by NESC does not correspond to that used in this Guide. Rather, 
NESC-2012 uses extreme to indicate use of the ASCE 7-05 maps for the 50 year return period, which, 
if used with the appropriate ASCE 7-05 load and resistance factors, corresponds to a design event as 
defined in Chapter 4 (Volume I) of this Guide. However, NESC extreme loads only apply to structures at 
least 18 m (60 ft) above ground. Since most communication distribution lines in the last mile are below 
18 m (60 ft), the lines would be designed for Rule 250B, which has lower loading requirements than 
Rules 250C and D.  
For communication distribution wires, the designer could use either the NESC or ASCE 7. Malmedal and 
Sen [2003] showed that past ASCE 7 loading standards have been more conservative than those of NESC, 
particularly for ice loading. ASCE 7 design criteria will provide a more conservative design, but may 
have a higher cost that is not desirable to utilities, service providers, or customers. When considering 
resilience, using a more conservative design for communication distribution lines in the last-mile to 
critical facilities may be a more effective means of meeting community resilience goals. 
In the communication industry, codes and standards provide baseline loading and design for 
infrastructure. However, the industry heavily relies on development and implementation of best practices, 
rather than regulations, to improve their infrastructure resilience. The FCCs CSRIC provides an excellent 
example of a body that supplements existing codes and standards by developing and publishing best 
practices for various network types (internet/data, wireless and wireline telephone) and provides an 
articulation of industry roles, including service providers, network operators, equipment suppliers, 
property managers, and government [CSRIC 2014]. Service providers often adapt these practices or 
develop their own best practices to help improve the infrastructure on which their business relies. Best 
practices developed by the CSRIC cover a wide array of topics ranging from training and awareness to 
cybersecurity and network operations. For the purposes of this document, only a handful of the best 
practices developed by the CSRIC (see Table 15-3) that relate to physical communications infrastructure 
are listed.  
As shown in Table 15-3, the best practices include many suggestions discussed in this chapter: 1) Standby 
power for critical equipment and cell sites; 2) Backup solutions for cooling critical equipment in 
Communication Buildings; 3) Limiting exposure of distribution lines, critical equipment, and standby 
generators to hazards; and 4) Minimizing single points of failure in communications buildings, and 
distribution network. The best practices [CSRIC 2014] emphasize ensuring a power supply because 
communications systems depend on power systems to function. Innovative technologies and solutions for 
maintaining external power infrastructure continue to be developed and are discussed in Chapter 13. 
185 
I  
Communication Systems  
Table 15-3: Example best practices for communications infrastructure 
Best Practice Description [CSRIC 2014]Applicable 
 
Infrastructure 
Network operators, service providers, equipment suppliers, and property managers should ensure the Central offices, nodes, 
inclusion of fire stair returns in their physical security designs. Further, they should ensure there are critical equipment 
no fire tower or stair re-entries into areas of critical infrastructure, where permitted by code. 
Network operators and service providers should prepare for HVAC or cabinet fan failures by ensuring Critical equipment  
conventional fans are available to cool heat-sensitive equipment, as appropriate. 
Network operators and service providers should consult National Fire Protection Association Central offices, nodes, 
Standards (e.g., NFPA 75 and 76) for guidance in the design of fire suppression systems. When critical equipment 
zoning regulations require sprinkler systems, an exemption should be sought for the use of non-
destructive systems. 
Network operators should provide back-up power (e.g., some combination of batteries, generator, fuel Cell sites and DLC RTs 
cells) at cell sites and remote equipment locations, consistent with the site specific constraints, 
criticality of the site, design load, and reliability of primary power. 
Network operators and property managers should consider alternative measures for cooling network Central offices, nodes, 
equipment facilities (e.g., powering HVAC on generator, deploying mobile HVAC units) in the event critical equipment 
of a power outage. 
Network operators, service providers, and property managers together with the power company and Distribution lines 
other tenants in the location, should verify that aerial power lines are not in conflict with hazards that 
could produce a loss of service during high winds or icy conditions. 
Back-up power: network operators, service providers, equipment suppliers, and property managers Central offices, nodes, 
should ensure all critical infrastructure facilities, including security equipment, devices, and critical equipment 
appliances protecting it are supported by backup power systems (e.g., batteries, generators, fuel cells). 
Network operators, service providers, and property managers should consider placing all power and Central offices, nodes, 
network equipment in a location to increase reliability in case of hazard (e.g., floods, broken water cell sites, DLC RTs, 
mains, fuel spillage). In storm surge areas, consider placing all power related equipment above the critical equipment 
highest predicted or recorded storm surge levels. 
Network operators, service providers, equipment suppliers, property managers, and public safety Critical equipment 
should design standby systems (e.g., power) to withstand harsh environmental conditions. 
Network operators, service providers, public safety, and property managers, when feasible, should Distribution lines 
provide multiple cable entry points at critical facilities (e.g., copper or fiber conduit) avoiding single 
points of failure (SPOF). 
Service providers, network operators, public safety, and property managers should ensure availability Critical equipment 
of emergency/backup power (e.g., batteries, generators, fuel cells) to maintain critical 
communications services during times of commercial power failures, including natural and human-
caused occurrences (e.g., earthquakes, floods, fires, power brown/black outs, terrorism). 
Emergency/backup power generators should be located onsite, when appropriate. 
Network operators and service providers should minimize single points of failure (SPOF) in paths Distribution 
linking network elements deemed critical to the operations of a network (with this design, two or 
more simultaneous failures or errors need to occur at the same time to cause a service interruption). 
Back-up power fuel supply: network operators, service providers, and property managers should Central offices/nodes, 
consider use of fixed alternate fuel generators (e.g., natural gas) connected to public utility supplies to cell sites, DLC RTs, 
reduce the strain on refueling. critical equipment.  
Network operators and public safety should identify primary and alternate transportation (e.g., air, Cell sites, DLC RTs, 
rail, highway, boat) for emergency mobile units and other equipment and personnel. critical equipment 
186 
I  
Communication Systems  
15.5.1.1. Implied or Stated Performance Levels for Design Hazard Levels 
For wind events, buildings and other structures are typically designed for serviceability, which focuses on 
lateral displacement of tall buildings, floor vibration, and measures related to building function or 
occupant comfort. Therefore, in a design wind event, the expectation is that neither the building structure 
nor envelope will fail. The ability of the building envelope to perform well (i.e., stay intact) is imperative 
for high wind events because they are typically associated with heavy rainfall events (e.g., thunderstorms, 
hurricanes, tornadoes). Therefore, even if the building frame was to perform well, but the envelope failed, 
rain infiltration could damage the contents, critical equipment, and induce enough water related damage 
that the building may have to be replaced. The design expectation is that a communications building 
would not have any significant damage for a design wind event, and would be fully operational within 24 
hours. The 24 hours of downtime should only be required for a high wind event to allow time to bring 
standby generators online if needed and to ensure all switches and critical electrical equipment are not 
damaged. 
Similarly, for a design flood event, a communications building would not be anticipated to fail. There is 
likely to be some damage to the building and its contents at lower elevations, particularly the basement. 
However, if the critical electrical equipment, switchgear, and standby power are located well above the 
inundation levels, the design expectation would be for communications buildings to be fully operational 
within 24 hours of the event. 
For earthquakes, buildings are designed for life safety through structural stability, but damage may occur. 
Therefore, communications buildings in highly seismic regions are likely to be damaged during the 
design earthquake. As a result, it is likely that there will be some, and possibly significant, loss of 
functionality of a central office following a design earthquake event. If the critical equipment and 
switchgear were designed and mounted to resist anticipated ground accelerations, downtime may be 
limited (e.g., less than one week). However, if the critical equipment and switchgear were not mounted to 
resist ground accelerations, it could be much longer before the communications building is fully 
functional again.  
For cell and broadcast towers, the primary hazard considered for design in TIA-222-G is wind. However, 
ice and earthquake are also considered. TIA-222-G provides three classes of tower structures [Wahba 
2003]: 
x Category I Structures  Used for structures where a delay in recovering services would be 
acceptable. Ice and earthquake are not considered for these structures, and wind speeds are based 
on the ASCE 7-05 Risk Category I. 
x Category II Structures  This is the standard category that represents hazard to human life and 
property if failure occurs. The ASCE 7-05 Risk Category II wind, ice, and seismic loads are used.  
x Category III Structures  Used for critical and emergency services. The ASCE 7-05 Risk 
Category III wind, ice, and seismic loads are used. 
For the design event, failures would only be anticipated for a small percentage of cell towers (e.g., less 
than five percent). It is noted that, as discussed in the previous section, the loading in TIA-222-G is based 
on that of ASCE 7-05. Cell towers are configured such that there is an overlap in service between towers 
so the signal can be transmitted as the user moves from one area to another without a disruption in 
service. Therefore, if one tower fails, other towers will cover most of the service since their service areas 
overlap.  
Communication distribution wires would likely experience some failures in the design event, particularly 
for wind and ice storms. As discussed in the previous section, most distribution lines in the last-mile are 
below 18 m (60 ft) above the ground and, hence, are not designed to meet what Chapter 4 (Volume I) 
defines as the design event if Rule 250B in NESC is followed for design. For lines designed to meet the 
187 
I  
Communication Systems  
NESC Rules 250C and 250D, it would be anticipated that only a small percentage of failure of the 
overhead wire would fail in a design ice or wind event. However, as discussed earlier in this chapter and 
in Chapter 13, tree fall onto distribution lines causes many failures rather than the loading of the natural 
hazard itself. Therefore, service providers should work with the electric power utility to ensure their tree-
trimming programs are maintained. Service providers and electric power utilities should also work with 
communities to ensure their residents understand the risks of not maintaining an aggressive tree-trimming 
program.  
15.5.1.2. Recovery Levels 
For distribution lines, the location of the cables is a key factor in performance during hazard events. 
However, some damage to the distribution lines may be expected for a design event.  
If the distribution lines are underground, failures and recovery time should be limited for a high wind or 
ice event, though underground distribution lines may be damaged by uprooting of trees. During a flood, if 
the distribution lines are not properly protected or there has been degradation of the cable material, 
failures could occur. During earthquakes, underground line failures may be due to ground movement or 
liquefaction. As discussed in Section 15.2.1, although underground lines may be less susceptible to 
damage, they are more difficult to access for repair and failures could result in recovery times of weeks 
rather than days.  
If the distribution lines are overhead, high wind and ice events may result in failures, primarily due to tree 
fall or other debris impacts on the lines. The debris impact on distribution lines is a factor that varies 
locally due to the surroundings and tree trimming programs that are intended to limit these disruptions. 
Although overhead lines are more likely to fail during high winds and ice events, recovery and repair time 
for a design event may range from a few days to a few weeks. Recovery time may be affected by the size 
of the area impacted, resources available, and accessibility to transportation routes. Note that this only 
accounts for repair of the communication distribution lines. Another major consideration is the recovery 
of external power lines so the end user is able to use their communications devices. Chapter 13 addresses 
the standards and codes, and their implied performance levels for an design event.  
15.5.2. Existing Construction 
Communication buildings designed and constructed within the past 20 years may have been designed 
with minimum load criteria from ASCE 7-88 to ASCE 7-05. Prior to that, ANSI standards may have been 
used. There have been many changes in design load criteria and methodology over the design life of 
existing central offices. However, additional factors need to be considered when evaluating the expected 
time for recovery of function following a hazard event, such as materials of construction, maintenance, 
and resources required to support repair and recovery of function. 
As discussed in Section 15.5.1, TIA-222-G is the current version of the standard used for cell and 
broadcast towers. However, the 1996 standard, ANSI/TIA-222-F, was used during the largest growth and 
construction of towers in the  [TIA 2014]. As noted in Section 15.5.1, earthquake was not 
considered in this version of the standard and allowable stress design was used rather than limit state 
design, which is based on reliability theory [Wahba 2003].  
Historically, communication distribution lines have been designed to NESC standards. The following 
items list some of the most significant changes to NESC Rule 250 that have occurred over the past couple 
of decades [IEEE 2015]: 
x Prior to 1997, NESC did not have an extreme wind load. Rule 250C adopted the ASCE 7 wind 
maps. 
188 
I  
Communication Systems  
x In 2002, Rule 250A4 was introduced to state that earthquakes are not anticipated to govern design 
since electric and communication wires and their supporting structures are flexible. 
x In 2007, Rule 250D was introduced for design of extreme ice from freezing rain combined with 
wind. 
These changes and their timeframes indicate that older distribution lines may be more vulnerable to 
failures from wind and ice events than newer systems. However, the NESC adoption of the new standards 
should support improved performance of overhead distribution lines. 
15.5.2.1. Implied or Stated Performance Levels for Design Hazard Levels 
As discussed in the previous section, ANSI/TIA-222-F (the 1996 standard) was in effect when the largest 
growth and construction of cell towers took place [TIA 2014]. For wind and ice, the towers designed 
according to this standard should be anticipated to only have a small percentage of failures for the design 
event as discussed in Section 15.5.1.1. However, earthquake loads were not included in cell tower 
standards prior to TIA-222-G [Wahba 2003]. Although earthquakes do not typically govern the design of 
cell towers, those located in highly seismic regions may be susceptible to failure if a design earthquake 
occurred. For existing towers designed to standards other than TIA-222-G in highly seismic regions, the 
design should be evaluated to see if earthquake loads govern and necessary retrofits should be identified if 
necessary to meet performance goals. Existing towers in seismic zones with electronics should also be 
updated to meet requirements of TIA-222-G. Despite the lack of earthquake load criteria in TIA-222-F, 
and older versions of this standard, designers in highly seismic regions may have considered earthquake 
load using other standards, such as ASCE 7.  
In large urban centers, cell towers may be located on buildings. Some of these buildings may be older and 
of unknown condition. As a result, failure of the building could lead to loss of the cell tower. Thus, when 
placing cell towers on top of buildings, the overall condition of these buildings should be considered.  
As discussed in Section 15.5.1.2, some communication distribution lines are anticipated to fail during an 
design event. Given that extreme ice loading was not included in the NESC standard until 2007, 
distribution lines designed to prior codes may be vulnerable to ice storms.  
15.5.2.2. Recovery Levels 
For wind loads, many communications buildings and cell and broadcast towers may be expected to 
perform reasonably well for a design event, and have a short recovery period. However, given that older 
standards of TIA-222 did not include earthquake load criteria, a large number of failures may occur 
during a seismic event and, hence, significant recovery time may be needed to repair or replace towers. 
To replace a large number of towers would take weeks, months, or even years depending on the size of 
the affected area.  
Service providers have the ability to provide cell-on-light trucks (COLTs) as interim measures so 
essential wireless communications can be brought online quickly after a hazard event in which the 
network experiences significant disruptions [AT&T 2014]. However, the COLTs are only intended for 
temporary or emergency situations. Furthermore, service providers may have alternative methods and 
solutions to restore service. For cell tower owners in earthquake prone regions, resilience in the 
communication infrastructure system should consider approaches to ensure that cell towers can perform 
as needed for design earthquake events.  
With respect to performance of distribution lines, performance and recovery time largely depends on the 
placement of cables (i.e., overhead versus underground) as discussed in Section 15.5.1.2.  
189 
I  
Communication Systems  
15.6. Strategies for Implementing Plans for Community Resilience 
15.6.1. Available Guidance 
There are three levels, or tiers, at which the communication infrastructure can be assessed, based on 
industry practices: 
Tier 1. A high level assessment of the anticipated performance of the components of the communication 
infrastructure system can be completed by those with knowledge and experience of how the components 
and system will behave in a hazard event. For communications buildings, this may include structural and 
electrical engineers and designers. For wires (both overhead and underground), and cell towers, this may 
include engineers, utility operators, service providers, and technical staff. As a minimum, each 
community should complete a high level (Tier 1) assessment of its infrastructure. The community can 
then decide whether additional investment is warranted for completing a more detailed assessment. The 
SPUR Framework [SPUR 2009] took this high level approach in assessing their infrastructure for the City 
of San Francisco, and is highly regarded as a good example for the work completed to date.  
Tier 2. A more detailed assessment can be conducted, based on an inventory of typical features within the 
communication infrastructure system, to develop generalized features for various components. To do this, 
the community would need to assess the performance of common components of their infrastructure 
system for a specific magnitude of event (i.e., model and analyze a scenario event and its resulting 
impacts). Alternatively, the community could assess a hazard event scenario to compute loads and effects 
(wind speeds and pressures, ground accelerations, flood elevations) and use expert judgment to estimate 
the anticipated performance of various components of the communications infrastructure.  
A Tier 2 communication infrastructure assessment includes the response of typical components 
independent of dependencies within the infrastructure system. The Oregon Resilience Plan [OSSPAC 
2013] provides a good example of modeling a hazard event to assess the resulting impacts on the current 
infrastructure. It used Hazus [FEMA 2015] to model and determine the impacts of a Cascadia earthquake 
on the infrastructure systems and used the losses output by the Hazus tool to back-calculate the current 
state of the infrastructure. 
Tier 3. For the most detailed assessment, Tier 3 would include all components in the communications 
infrastructure system, intra-dependencies within the system, and dependencies on other infrastructure 
systems. A probabilistic approach, such as fragilities, could be developed for each component of the 
communications infrastructure system. A Tier 3 assessment would use models and tools to determine both 
the load effects on infrastructure due to the hazard and the resulting performance, including dependencies. 
Currently, there are no publicly available tools that can be used to model the dependencies between 
infrastructure systems. 
15.6.2. Solutions for Future Construction 
For future construction, designers are encouraged to consider how to best achieve community resilience 
goals rather than designing to minimum code requirements. It is important to consider the communication 
infrastructure because a failure of one part may impact the rest of the system. Therefore, if a critical 
component is non-redundant (e.g., a lone central office, or a single point of entry for telephone wires into 
a critical facility), solutions could include future redundancy or improved performance of the component 
through retrofit or replacement.  
Throughout this chapter, there are examples of success stories and failures of communications 
infrastructure due to different types of hazards (wind, flood, earthquake, ice storms). Designers, planners, 
and decision makers should consider these examples, as well as other relevant examples, when planning 
for and constructing new communication infrastructure. There are several construction and administrative 
190 
I  
Communication Systems  
solutions that can be used to successfully improve the resilience of communications infrastructure 
systems within a community.  
Construction Solutions for Future Communications Buildings. With respect to communications 
buildings that are owned by service providers, the service provider can incorporate design requirements 
for the desired performance of critical building during a hazard event. If a community or region faces 
multiple hazards, different failure modes may occur and have varying levels of anticipated damage and 
recovery time.  
Sections of buildings are often leased by service providers to store their equipment for maintenance and 
repairs. Evaluation of leased buildings will support availability of necessary equipment after a hazard 
event. If a building is in the design phase, the service provider could potentially work with the building 
owner and designers to ensure their section(s) of the building will perform as desired. There may be 
additional initial costs with this approach. However, a cost-to-benefit ratio of the investment versus losing 
critical equipment needed to restore services can be considered. 
Administrative Solutions for Future Communications Buildings. Although the design and construction 
of buildings that house critical equipment for the communications network is an important consideration, 
administrative solutions can also be effective. Service providers who own or lease buildings for 
communications services should consider how to reduce vulnerabilities to hazards. For example, central 
offices vulnerable to flooding can locate critical electrical equipment or standby generators above design 
flood levels. Similarly, for earthquake prone areas, service providers can isolate or mount critical 
equipment to ensure it is functional after a hazard event.  
An alternative to raising all critical equipment is to protect it so 
water does not enter the central office during a flood event. 
Sandbags are often used in North America to temporarily protect 
buildings or openings of buildings from flooding. However, 
sandbag barriers are not always effective. After the magnitude 9.0 
earthquake and tsunami in the Great Tohoku region of Japan 2011, 
Kwasinksi [2011] observed that watertight doors performed well 
in areas that experienced significant damage and were effective in 
preventing flooding of critical electronic equipment in central 
offices. Watertight doors, such as that shown in Figure 15-7, can 
be used to prevent water from entering a central office during a 
flood. Other openings, such as windows, may also need to be 
sealed effectively [Kwasinski 2011]. 
Construction Solutions for Future Cell and Broadcast Towers. 
To meet desired performance goals, design criteria for future cell  
and broadcast towers may include requirements in accordance with Figure 15-7: Watertight door used 
the TIA-222-G standard, as well as other criteria needed to meet on central office in Kamaishi, 
the desired performance. For wind and ice, it is expected that if the Japan  
towers are designed and constructed in accordance with the 
appropriate standards, only a small percentage of cell towers 
would be damaged or fail in a design event. With respect to an earthquake event, where the design 
philosophy is life safety, it may be necessary to consider designing beyond the standard criteria. 
Administrative Solutions for Future Cell and Broadcast Towers. Historically, the predominant cause of 
outages of cell towers has been the loss of electrical power. As discussed in Section 15.2.2, the FCCs 
attempt to mandate a minimum of eight hours of battery standby power to overcome this problem was 
removed by the courts. However, service providers should consider how to provide adequate standby 
power and ensure backhaul availability to maintain functionality following a hazard event.  
191 
I  
Communication Systems  
Standby generators for towers need to be designed and placed appropriately. Standby generators for cell 
towers that are elevated above the design flood level or to withstand ground accelerations will be 
available to support recovery efforts.  
Additional protection may need to be implemented for cell and broadcast towers. As discussed in Section 
15.2.2, storm surge debris impacts from boats resulted in failure of cell towers. Impacts from uprooted 
trees or branches during flood or wind events could also result in failure of these towers. Therefore, the 
topography and surroundings (e.g., relative distance from trees or harbors to cell towers) may need to be 
considered to ensure cell towers are protected from debris impact.  
Solutions for Future Distribution Line to End User. There are a number of factors to consider regarding 
whether underground or overhead wires are the best way to distribute services to the end user. For future 
distribution lines, the following factors may help identify which method to use: 
x Building cluster to which the services are being distributed 
x Prevailing hazards  
x Topography and terrain for distribution lines 
x Redundancy or path diversity of distribution lines 
x Cost/benefit of distribution methods 
The typical utility access of the building cluster to which the services are being delivered is a key 
consideration. The hazards the community faces can help determine how to reduce interruption of service 
to the building. For example, in regions that are susceptible to high winds events, overhead wires would 
likely result in poorer performance during wind events because of failures due to wind loading or debris 
impact. Redundancy or path diversity of communications distribution lines to end users can improve the 
likelihood of continuation of services after a hazard event. For example, single points of failure in the last 
mile of distribution can result in longer outages.  
15.6.3. Solutions for Existing Construction 
Similar to future systems, there are several construction and administrative solutions that can improve the 
resilience of existing communication infrastructure systems within a community. However, existing 
components need to be evaluated to understand any vulnerabilities. If it is determined that a component is 
vulnerable to a hazard event, solutions can be developed to address the vulnerability and the desired 
performance goals for community resilience.  
Communication infrastructure systems are large, distributed systems, with much of the existing 
infrastructure owned by service providers or third party owners (e.g., building owners). Resilience is 
achieved over time by communities and service providers. It is not reasonable to expect that capital is 
available for service providers (or third parties) to upgrade all infrastructure within a short period of time. 
Prioritization of solutions and development of resilience strategies by the community and its stakeholders 
can provide steady progress to improving community and infrastructure system performance. By 
evaluating the inventory of existing infrastructure, service providers can identify weaknesses and 
implement solutions for future construction that avoid the same weaknesses. 
Construction Solutions for Existing Communications Buildings. Existing buildings may need to be 
assessed to determine if the building and critical equipment will be able to meet desired performance 
goals. If the building is a non-redundant node in the infrastructure network, a higher level of performance 
than that provided by the design event may be considered, such as the extreme hazard level. However, if 
the building is a redundant node, and its failure would not cause significant service interruptions, the 
design event may provide adequate performance. 
192 
I  
Communication Systems  
If the service provider finds its communications building will not be able to withstand the loading for the 
appropriate level of hazard event, steps may be taken to retrofit the building or to relocate the services to a 
better location. Although retrofit options may be expensive, if the building is critical to performance 
following a hazard event, the investment may be worthwhile.  
Administrative Solutions for Existing Communications Buildings. Assessment of critical equipment in 
communications building or other nodes/exchanges in the network can help determine whether the 
desired performance will be achieved. Critical equipment can be elevated for flood events, or watertight 
doors are a possible alternative to protecting critical equipment in communications buildings from water 
infiltration. 
Construction Solutions for Existing Cell and Broadcast Towers. Existing cell and broadcast towers 
should be evaluated to determine whether they can resist the loading from the prevailing design events the 
community faces.  
Administrative Solutions for Existing Cell and Broadcast Towers. Assessment of required standby 
power for individual or a group of towers can help balance the desired performance against the available 
resources. Although it may not be economically feasible to provide standby generators for all towers 
immediately, a program can be developed to accomplish this over time. The immediate surroundings of 
cell or broadcast tower sites should be assessed to determine vulnerabilities to airborne and waterborne 
debris. If the site is located such that it is vulnerable to tree fall or other debris in a high wind or flood 
event, additional protection should be provided to protect the cell or broadcast tower. 
Solutions for Existing Distribution Line to End User. For existing distribution lines to the end user, an 
inventory of wires, including the type, age, and condition should be recorded. When wires are damaged or 
have deteriorated due to age, they should be retired and/or replaced.  
If a service provider is considering switching from overhead wires to underground wires to avoid possible 
outages due to ice storms or high wind events, a cost-benefit ratio can support the assessment and 
decision making process. If cost is much greater than projected benefits, the service provider may want to 
consider other priorities to make the infrastructure more resilient. For instance, the service provider may 
find it more economical to add redundancy. Such a solution would not reduce the vulnerability of existing 
overhead wires, but would reduce the risk of service interruptions.  
Administrative Solutions for Critical Facilities/Users  Prioritized Calls within Congested Network. 
Communications network congestion often occurs during and immediately after a hazard event. The 
following programs have been implemented to help critical users in communities have priority when 
networks are congested due to a hazard event [DHS 2015]:  
x Government Emergency Telecommunications Service (GETS) 
x Wireless Priority Service (WPS) 
GETS works through a series of enhancements to the wireline network. It is intended for use in the 
immediate aftermath of hazard events to support national security and emergency response. Cell phones 
can also use the GETS network; however, they will not receive priority treatment until the call reaches the 
wireline system. In contrast, WPS is used to prioritize cell phone calls of users who support national 
security and emergency response when the wireless network is congested or partially damaged. WPS is 
supported by nine service providers: AT&T, C Spire, Cellcom, Southern LINC, Sprint, T-Mobile, GCI, 
US Cellular, and Verizon Wireless [DHS 2015]. The GETS card has no cost and a small charge of 7-10 
cents per minute depending upon the carrier. WPS requires a one-time setup fee of $10, a monthly fee of 
$2 to $4 depending on the carrier, and approximately 75 cents per minute when making a priority call.  
The GETS and WPS programs are helpful in coordinating recovery efforts in the wake of a hazard event. 
However, the main goal of these programs is to provide priority service when there is congestion due to 
193 
I  
Communication Systems  
limited damage and overloaded capacity. If a significant amount of the infrastructure fails, these services 
may not be available.  
Administrative Solutions for Critical Facilities/Users  Prioritized Recovery. Telecommunications 
Service Priority (TSP) is an FCC program that enables service providers to give service priority to users 
enrolled in the program when they need additional lines or need service to be restored after a disruption 
[FCC 2015a]. Like GETS and WPS, eligible entities for TSP include police departments, fire 
departments, 9-1-1 call centers, emergency responders, and essential health care providers (e.g., 
hospitals).  
Short-Term Solutions for Restoring Service. Service providers can budget for necessary short-term 
changes (0-5 years), which may include solutions such as placement and security of critical equipment 
and standby generators. For the long term (5+ years), service providers can address more expensive 
resilience gaps that include retrofitting existing communications buildings and improving the 
performance of distribution lines. However, it is important to understand that unlike utilities that have the 
ability to fund infrastructure upgrades through approved rate increases (e.g., through a Public Utilities 
Commission), service providers are part of the private sector.  
Although not all resilience gaps can be addressed in the short term through investment in infrastructure, 
service providers can use other solutions to address these gaps. Ensuring there is a recovery plan in place 
so service to customers is not lost for an extended period of time helps minimize downtime. For example, 
AT&Ts Network Disaster Recovery (NDR) team uses temporary deployments to minimize service 
disruptions that focus on central office and recovery of technology [AT&T 2005]. It also has a special 
operations function that would navigate in hazardous materials (hazmat) environment to maintain 
functionality of the network.  
Following hazard events, service providers  might deploy charging stations so that everyone in the 
community can maintain functionality of their cell phones. Communities may also choose to invest in 
charging stations that could be deployed after hazard events so that the community would have these 
stations prepositioned in areas the communities feel are most critical or will have the largest percentage of 
need. 
Using satellite telephones can be an alternative for critical facilities or emergency responders in the 
immediate aftermath of a hazard event. Satellite phones are almost the only type of electronic 
communications system that will work when cell towers are damaged and central offices or 
exchanges/nodes have failed [Stephan 2007]. Unfortunately, satellite phones are used infrequently, 
especially with the continuing growth of cellular phones. In 1999, the State of Louisiana used Federal 
funds to provide the states parishes with a satellite phone to use in the event of an emergency, but the 
state stopped providing the funding to cover a monthly $65 access fee one year before Hurricane Katrina 
occurred [Stephan 2009]. As a result, only a handful of churches kept the satellite phones. However, even 
for those parishes that did keep their satellite phones, they did little to alleviate the communications 
problem because nobody else had them when Hurricane Katrina occurred. In general, people do not own 
satellite telephones so this is not the best solution for an entire community. However, for critical facilities 
and communications between emergency responders or within critical facilities (e.g., hospitals), satellite 
telephones may be a viable option to ensure that the ability to communicate is preserved.  
194 
I  
Communication Systems  
15.7. References 
American Lifelines Alliance (ALA 2006) Power Systems, Water, Transportation and Communications 
Lifeline Interdependencies, American Lifelines Alliance (ALA) draft report to the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) and the National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS), Washington, DC, 
March, 
http://www.cimap.vt.edu/sites/www.cimap.vt.edu/files/docs/ALA%20Lifeline%20Report%20Final%20D
raft%20030606.pdf. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 1993) ASCE 7-93: Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
and Other Structures, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural Engineering Institute 
(SEI), Reston, VA. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 1995) ASCE 7-95: Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
and Other Structures, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural Engineering Institute 
(SEI), Reston, VA. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2002) ASCE 7-02: Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
and Other Structures, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural Engineering Institute 
(SEI), Reston, VA. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2005) ASCE 7-05: Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
and Other Structures, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural Engineering Institute 
(SEI), Reston, VA. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2010) ASCE 7-10: Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
and Other Structures, Second Edition, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural 
Engineering Institute (SEI), Reston, VA. 
AT&T (2005) Best Practices: AT&T Network Continuity Overview, 
http://www.corp.att.com/ndr/pdf/cpi_5181.pdf.  
AT&T (2014) http://www.corp.att.com/ndr/deployment1.html, Viewed August 28, 2014.  
Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure (CPNI 2006) Telecommunications Resilience Good 
Practice Guide, Version 4, United Kingdom, March.  
City of Urbana Public Works Department (2001) Overhead to Underground Utility Conversion, Urbana, 
Illinois, http://www2.city.urbana.il.us/_Agendas_-_Packets_-_Minutes/Agendas_2002/01-14-
2002/Overhead_Utility_Report.pdf. 
Communications Security, Reliability, and Interoperability Council (CSRIC 2014) CSRIC Best Practices, 
Communications Security, Reliability, and Interoperability Council (CSRIC), Public Safety & Homeland 
Security Bureau, https://www.fcc.gov/nors/outage/bestpractice/BestPractice.cfm. Viewed December 16, 
2014.  
Department of Homeland Security (DHS 2006) A performance Review of FEMAs Disaster Management 
Activities in Response to Hurricane Katrina, Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Washington, DC.  
Department of Homeland Security (DHS 2015) GETS/WPS Documents, Washington, DC, 
http://www.dhs.gov/publication/getswps-documents#. Viewed January 13, 2015. DHS,  
Department of the Army (2007) Reliability/Availability of Electrical & Mechanical Systems for 
Command, Control, Communications, Computer, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) 
Facilities. January 19, 2007.  
Erichsen, John R. (2014) ANSI/TIA-222-G Explained, Tower Numerics, Inc. Lexington, MA , 
http://www.towernx.com/downloads/TIA-222-G_Explained.pdf. Viewed July 5, 2014. 
195 
I  
Communication Systems  
Federal Communications Commission (FCC 2011) Telecommunications Act of 1996, 
www.fcc.gov/telecom.html. Viewed July 5, 2014.  
Federal Communications Commission (FCC 2013) Impact of the June 2012 Derecho on Communications 
Networks and Services  Report and Recommendations, Washington, DC. 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC 2015a) Telecommunications Service Provider, 
http://www.fcc.gov/encyclopedia/telecommunications-service-priority. Viewed January 13, 2015. 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC 2015b) Emergency Alert System (EAS) 
http://www.fcc.gov/encyclopedia/emergency-alert-system-eas. Viewed March 20, 2015. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2002) World Trade Center Building Performance 
Study: Data Collection, Preliminary Observations, and Recommendations, Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA), New York, New York. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2013) Mitigation Assessment Team Report: Hurricane 
Sandy in New Jersey and New York. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Fiber-to-the-Home Council (FTTH Council 2013) Comments of the Fiber-to-the Home Council on 
Request to Refresh Record and Amend the Commissions Copper Retirement Rules. Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2015) Hazus: FEMAs Methodology for Estimating 
Potential Losses from Disasters. https://msc.fema.gov/portal/resources/hazus. Viewed April 19, 2015. 
FEMA, Washington, DC/ 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE 2015) History of the National Electrical Safety 
Code ANSI C2, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), 
http://standards.ieee.org/about/nesc/100/. Viewed January 26, 2015.  
Jrad, Ahman et al. (2005) Wireless and Wireline Network Interactions in Disaster Scenarios, Military 
Communications Conference, Washington, DC. 
Jrad, Ahman et al. (2006) Dynamic Changes in Subscriber Behavior and their Impact on the Telecom 
Network in Cases of Emergency, Military Communications Conference, Washington, DC. 
Kende, Michael and Charles Hurpy (2012) Assessment of the Impact of Internet Exchange Points  
Empirical Study of Kenya and Nigeria, Analysys Mason Limited, Washington, DC, April. 
Kentucky Public Service Commission (2009) Ike and Ice: The Kentucky Public Service Commission 
Report on the September 2008 Wind Storm and the January 2009 Ice Storm, November 19, 
https://psc.ky.gov/IkeIce/Report.pdf.  
Kwasinski, Alexis (2009) Telecom Power Planning for Natural Disasters: Technology Implications and 
Alternatives to U.S. Federal Communications Commissions Katrina Order in View of the Effects of 
2008 Atlantic Hurricane Season, 31st International Telecommunications Energy Conference (INTELEC). 
Kwasinski, Alexis (2011) Effect of Notable Natural Disasters from 2005 to 2011 on Telecommunications 
Infrastructure: Lessons from on-site Damage Assessments, 2011 IEEE International Telecommunications 
Energy Conference (INTELEC). 
Kwasinski, Alexis; Wayne Weaver; Philip Krein; and Patrick Chapman (2006) Hurricane Katrina: 
Damage Assessment of Power Infrastructure for Distribution, Telecommunication, and Backup, 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Urbana-Champaign, IL.  
Lower Manhattan Telecommunications Users Working Group (2002) Lower Manhattan 
Telecommunications Users Working Group Findings and Recommendations: Building a 21st Century 
Telecom Infrastructure, New York City, NY, August, http://www.nexxcomwireless.com/wp/wp-
content/uploads/2013/10/Building-a-21st-Century-Telecom-Infrastructure-Lower-Manhattan.pdf. 
196 
I  
Communication Systems  
Malmedal, Keith and P.K. Sen (2003) Structural Loading Calculations of Wood Transmission Structures, 
IEEE Rural Electric Power Conference. 
Mehta, Kishor (2010) Wind Load History ANSI A58.1-1972 to ASCE 7-05. Structures Congress, 
American Society of Civil Engineers. 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA 2013) Service Assessment: The Historic 
Derecho of June 29, 2012, National Weather Service (NWS), Silver Spring, MD, January, 
http://www.nws.noaa.gov/os/assessments/pdfs/derecho12.pdf. 
Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission (OSSPAC 2013) The Oregon Resilience Plan: 
Reducing Risk and Improving Recovery for the Next Cascadia Earthquake and Tsunami, Salem, Oregon. 
PPD-21 (2013) Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-21, The White House, February 12, 2013, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/02/12/presidential-policy-directive-critical-
infrastructure-security-and-resil. 
San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association (SPUR 2009) The Resilient City: What San 
Francisco Needs from its Seismic Mitigation Policies, San Francisco Planning and Urban Research 
Association (SPUR), San Francisco, CA. 
Stephan, Karl D. (2007) Weve got to Talk: Emergency Communications and Engineering Ethics, 
Technology and Society Magazine, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Society on 
Social Implications of Technology, 26(3), pp. 42-48, 10 September . 
Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA 2006) Structural Standards for Antenna Supporting 
Structures and Antennas, TIA -222-G, Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA), Arlington, VA. 
Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA 2014) TR-14 Structural Standards for Communication 
and Small Wind Turbine Support Structures, http://www.tiaonline.org/all-standards/committees/tr-14. 
Viewed September 22, 2014.  
The City of New York (2013) A Stronger, More Resilient New York, The City of New York, New York. 
The Lifelines Council of the City and County of San Francisco (2014) Lifelines Interdependency Study 1 
Report, San Francisco, California, 
http://www.sfgsa.org/modules/showdocument.aspx?documentid=12025.  
Victory, Nancy et al. (2006) Report and Recommendations of the Interdependent Panel Reviewing the 
Impact of Hurricane Katrina on Communications Networks, Washington, DC. 
Wahba, John; D. Brinker; M. Malouf; and J. Erichsen (2003) New Standards for Broadcast Structures 
ANSI/EIA/TIA-222-G, http://www.mei1inc.com/NAB-2003presentation.pdf.  
West Virginia Broadband, Broadband Glossary, 
http://www.westvirginia.com/broadband/mediaroom/BroadbandGlossary.pdf. Viewed July 15, 2014. 
197 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
16. Water and Wastewater Systems 
Water and Wastewater Systems Executive Summary 
Water and wastewater infrastructure systems are essential for sustaining the economic and social viability 
of a community. The average consumption of water across the U.S. has been calculated to be 98 gallons 
per person per day for activities such as drinking, cooking, personal hygiene, flushing toilets, and laundry 
[Aubuchon & Morley 2012]. Similarly most businesses and industries are dependent on water and 
wastewater disposal. Communities can generally accommodate short-term disruptions in water and 
wastewater services resulting from hazard events. However, longer-term outages are highly disruptive to 
community recovery and functions.  
Water systems are supplied by either surface or ground water. Water systems treat and store the water, 
and move it to the end user through a system of pipelines. Wastewater systems operate in the reverse, 
collecting wastewater, and moving it through a system of pipelines and pump stations to a treatment plant 
where it is discharged into a receiving water (e.g., river or bay) or, if adequately treated, into an aquifer.  
These systems are vulnerable to natural and human-caused events. Supplies can be disrupted due to 
floods, spills, wildfires, and landslides. Transmission pipelines may be damaged by landslides, floods and 
earthquakes. Treatment plants can be submerged when levees are overtopped, sometimes requiring weeks 
or months to restore service. Earthquakes can damage treatment plant structures and equipment as a result 
of lateral loading (due to shaking) and failure of foundations (due to liquefaction). Storage reservoirs are 
subjected to seismically-induced forces on their contents, buckling tank walls. Buried pipelines, both 
water and sewer, may suffer failures caused by ground movement in earthquakes and floods. 
Communities have experienced myriad incidents that have resulted in impacts to water and wastewater 
systems requiring weeks or months to restore. 
The large and distributed nature of water and wastewater systems, combined with their dependence on 
other infrastructure systems, limits the practicality of maintaining a 100 % operational capacity after a 
major natural hazard. Desired performance goals need to be developed with stakeholders, including 
individual utilities. It is important to consider the uniqueness of the infrastructure of individual utilities 
and the specific needs of their customers when adopting system performance goals for a community. 
Water and wastewater stakeholder engagement is critical in establishing a community-specific level of 
service performance goals for each of the three different hazard levels (routine, design, and extreme). 
Dependencies of water and wastewater systems on other infrastructure also needs to be considered when 
developing performance goals. For instance, availability of a reliable supply of liquid fuel impacts how 
long systems can run on standby generators. The available supply of liquid fuel also impacts repair crews 
vehicles and equipment. In turn, local delivery of liquid fuels depends on the status of the highway and 
bridge transportation network. Electric power is required for pumping, communication, and control 
systems. 
Focusing on major system components that form a backbone network capable of supplying key health and 
safety-related community needs shortly after a hazard event is one way to focus priorities for community 
recovery. Less costly short-term solutions combined with longer term improvements to infrastructure 
systems can increase community resilience and help with the cost of implementing solutions. 
Performance goals for critical water and wastewater system functions should be developed for short 
(days), intermediate (weeks), and long (months) duration outages. It is important that performance goals 
take into account the communitys social and infrastructure needs. 
Federal and state governments set requirements for water and wastewater system performance on a day to 
day, or year to year basis, but are generally silent on performance when subjected to catastrophic events. 
198 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Over the years, codes and standards have been developed to address the performance of system structures 
for various hazards, e.g., wind and earthquake loads. While most modern buildings and structures are 
expected to perform well during design events, older structures may not be as robust. However, buried 
pipelines may be vulnerable to ground disturbances caused by flooding or earthquakes.  
Water and wastewater facilities often contain both older and newer components constructed to different 
specifications. Assessments to evaluate the anticipated performance of these system components and the 
overall system during hazard events will help predict whether they will meet the desired performance 
goals. The process should include an assessment of the time it would take to restore service given the 
damage state of the various facilities. For example, how long will it take a water treatment plant to restore 
operation? How long will it take to repair all of the pipelines?  
Bringing a utility to the desired level of performance, to be able to meet the desired goals, may take 
decades. Even so, it is important to develop performance goals, evaluate the systems ability to meet those 
performance goals when tested by a hazard event, and identify the gaps. Plans should be developed to 
address those gaps and implement the solutions to enhance community resilience over a selected time 
frame. 
16.1. Introduction 
This chapter addresses community resilience of public drinking water and wastewater systems, which are 
essential for sustaining the economic and social viability of a community [Hoover, 1941]. Although these 
systems provide basic public health and safety to homes, businesses, and industry, they are often taken for 
granted because of the high level of service and reliability provided daily by water and wastewater 
utilities. The importance of these systems is not recognized until a water main break or other disruptions 
in service occurs.  
Some utilities may develop targeted capital improvement plans to improve the resilience of their systems, 
and other utilities may only perform emergency repairs. Demands on water and wastewater systems 
include sustaining system capacity while meeting population growth, or making system improvements to 
maintain public health and satisfy environmental regulations. Communities have an opportunity to 
improve resilience through planned retrofits or replacements to improve the resilience of water and 
wastewater infrastructure systems.  
However, the water and wastewater systems face challenges beyond infrastructure performance. Drinking 
water quality and environmental impact are two key issues. For example, if drinking water of poor quality 
is delivered to customers, there is significant risk that the public may become ill from consumption. 
Wastewater utilities operate within strict environmental constraints to prevent excessive pollution that 
contributes to environmental damage and, ultimately, impacts the health of the humans and animals. 
Although this chapter touches on such issues, its main focus is how to develop a more resilient 
infrastructure system that delivers water and wastewater services with fewer disruptions.  
16.1.1. Social Needs and Systems Performance Goals 
Water services are essential to our daily lives. Using USGS data, Aubuchon & Morley [2012] calculated 
the average consumption of water across all U.S. states to be 371 liters (98 gallons) per person per day. 
However, water consumption varies by community and by customer. Personal uses include water for 
drinking and cooking, personal hygiene, flushing toilets, laundry, landscape irrigation, and many others. 
Many businesses and industries depend on a continual supply of potable water and wastewater collection 
services. Absent functioning drinking water and wastewater systems, the operation of restaurants, child 
care facilities, hotels, medical offices, food processing plants, paper mills, etc., would be significantly 
compromised. Additionally, drinking water systems are often the primary source of water for fire 
199 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
suppression in many communities. Chapter 10 discusses societal dependence on water and wastewater 
systems and other infrastructure systems in more detail. 
In the , communities can generally accommodate short-term (on the order of a few days) 
disruptions in water and wastewater services resulting from human-caused or natural hazard events. 
However, longer-term events can be highly disruptive to the entire community. The Oregon Resilience 
Plan [OSSPAC, 2013] indicated that if a business cannot reoccupy its facilities within one month, it may 
be forced to move or dissolve. Such timelines vary depending on the community and the severity of the 
event. Development of realistic desired performance goals for post-event level of service by water and 
wastewater utility providers can provide a direct long-term benefit to the community they serve. This 
includes evaluating the systems status in relation to those goals, and developing solutions to close the 
identified resilience gaps. Water flow, pressure, and quality should be considered in the performance 
goals.  
16.1.2. Dependencies 
As discussed in Chapter 11, water system operations depend on other infrastructure systems, both for day-
to-day operation and for restoration following a hazard event. System dependencies (e.g., loss of 
commercial electrical power in a high wind event) can have a significant impact on the operations of 
water and wastewater systems [Elliott and Tang 2009]. Electric power is necessary for maintaining 
pumping and treatment operations. Transportation systems allow access for inspection and repairs after 
the event, as well as supplying necessary chemicals and equipment for operation. However, many of these 
systems also have dependencies on the water systems. Figure 16-1 presents some dependencies of the 
water infrastructure system with other infrastructure systems.  
 
Figure 16-1: Water dependencies with other infrastructure systems 
200 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Some of the most important dependencies for the water and wastewater infrastructure systems are 
explained as follows: 
1. Energy (electric and fuel). Water and wastewater utilities rely on commercial electricity to run 
pumps, treatment processes, and lab and office operations. Some of these functions may have 
standby power, but overall power demands make it impractical for most water and wastewater 
systems to operate entirely on standby generators. However, short-term power loss events are 
often mitigated by use of standby generators for critical equipment to maintain basic water and 
wastewater operations. These emergency conditions depend on a sustained fuel supply for 
standby generators, utility vehicles, and equipment. Disruption in fuel production, storage, or 
delivery may severely impact a water utilitys ability to sustain operations on standby generator 
power and to perform repairs.  
2. Transportation (staff, supplies, pipelines). Staff at water and wastewater facilities depend on 
roadway and bridge transportation systems for facility access. Damage to transportation 
infrastructure potentially complicates and lengthens repair times or even prevents repairs until 
roadways and bridges are usable. Water and wastewater utilities may have a limited stock of 
pipes, fittings, and other repair materials to use in response and recovery operations. Depending 
on the size of the event, this stock may be quickly depleted due to supply chain disruptions. Such 
disruptions may also impact the available equipment and personnel support from mutual aid, such 
as the Water/Wastewater Agency Response Network (WARN). Utilities also rely on a semi-
regular delivery of treatment process chemicals that are essential for meeting water quality 
regulations that ensure public and environmental health. 
3. Water and wastewater distribution and conveyance. Water and wastewater distribution and 
conveyance networks are often under or adjacent to roadways, and in many instances are co-
located with other buried infrastructure. Failure of underground utilities may result in damage to 
the roadway (e.g., sinkhole from water main break or collapsed sewer) and significantly impact 
traffic. In addition, damage to the road or bridge systems can also compromise the functionality 
of underground utilities.  
4. Communications and information. Water and wastewater utilities often rely on radio, 
microwave, cellular and related networks to communicate to operations staff and contractors. If 
these networks are down for an extended period, complications and delays in operations and 
repairs can occur. Additionally, supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) networks are 
used extensively within both water and wastewater systems to monitor and control various 
processes and equipment.  
The communications system infrastructure also depends on water infrastructure. For example, air 
conditioning system cooling towers that support communications require water to keep sensitive 
electronic equipment in central offices at safe operating temperatures. Furthermore, fire 
ordinances may prohibit occupancy if water and wastewater systems are not functioning. 
5. Buildings (critical, commercial, general public). Water and wastewater utilities rely on 
administrative buildings. New Orleans water and sewer operations (e.g., treatment, distribution, 
collection, and administrative) were severely impacted following Hurricane Katrina, and included 
the loss of customer billing and other records due to significant flooding. During this same event, 
a hospital in New Orleans was forced to evacuate when the hospital lost water pressure and was 
unable to maintain the HVAC system needed by patients in critical care units [Randon, 2006]. 
Buildings need water supply with adequate flow and pressure for fire suppression, as well as 
sanitation. Industrial facilities need functional water and wastewater systems for developing, 
processing, and manufacturing materials and products. The public relies on water and wastewater 
services for overall health of the community.  
201 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Water and wastewater utilities rely on customers (e.g., commercial and residential) as a continued 
source of capital. Utilities may have significant capital expenditures after a hazard event and loss 
of service may lead to displacement of customers or the event may result in customer loss of 
personal income or inability to send payments. 
16.2. Water and Wastewater Infrastructure 
This section describes basic components of water and wastewater systems. Performance observations 
from past hazard events characterize some key hazard vulnerabilities in water and wastewater systems. 
Water and wastewater infrastructure are vulnerable to a number of hazards: buried pipelines are 
vulnerable to breaks during earthquakes, and water and wastewater treatment facilities are vulnerable to 
flood hazards. Facilities are often placed in or near flood hazard areas, which is consistent with their 
functional dependency on natural water resources.  
16.2.1. Water Infrastructure 
Drinking water is treated to satisfy public health standards and distributed to consumers by a network of 
pipelines. Some water utilities have their own supply and treatment infrastructure, while others buy 
wholesale water from neighboring utilities. 
Drinking water systems are composed of six general infrastructure categories: 1) supply, 2) transmission, 
3) treatment, 4) pumping, 5) storage, and 6) distribution. The basic function of each category and 
infrastructure system (electric power, transportation, communication) can be impacted by a variety of 
hazards, as shown in Table 16-1 and discussed in Section 16.1.2. Some examples of hazard related 
impacts on water infrastructure seen in past events are discussed in the following sections. 
16.2.1.1. Supply 
Drinking water supply can come from groundwater or surface water, as described below. In some cases, 
utilities may have both groundwater and surface water supplies. 
Groundwater. Rainfall and snowmelt recharge groundwater aquifers. Groundwater wells tap aquifers and 
supply water to individual households or public water systems. A well system consists of the groundwater 
aquifer, well casing and screen, pump and motor, power supply, electrical equipment and controls, 
connecting piping, and possibly a well house structure. Typically, wells are cased with a steel pipe. 
Screens in the well casing at the depth of the aquifer allow water to enter the casing. A submersible or 
surface-mounted pump conveys water to the transmission system. 
Surface Water. Rainfall and snowmelt collects in streams, rivers, and lakes, and is sometimes impounded 
by dams for a drinking water supply. Water intake structures in lakes or rivers and dams then convey the 
source water to treatment facility. Intake structures generally include some type of bar screens to keep 
large debris and aquatic life from entering the treatment plant.  
Contamination of surface and groundwater sources may occur during or after natural and human-caused 
hazards. In flood conditions, groundwater well heads can be inundated. If contaminants enter well 
systems they will require extensive flushing to recover, and in some cases may not be recoverable. In 
surface water systems, flooding can increase turbidity and contaminants like petroleum and nutrient or 
organic matter can overwhelm treatment operations and pose a public health risk.  
Contamination can also result from accidental releases from industrial sources in the watershed. In 2014, 
in West Virginia, 4-methylcyclohexanemethanol (MCHM) was released into the Elk River, contaminating 
water serving 300,000 people. It took months to restore full water service [Rosen et al., 2014]. 
202 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Table 16-1: Common hazards and their potential related consequences [Adapted from Preparedness, 
Emergency Response, and Recovery CIPAC Workgroup 2009] 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Potential Related Consequences ts
 
 
   
 
 
 
FloodExtreme WindsLightningDrought/Water Supply LossHurricane, TornadoEarthquakeSevere Weather (e.g., ice/snow/storms)Fire/WildfirePower or Communication FailureWeapons of Mass DestructionCyber AttackInfrastructure FailureHazardous Material ReleaseVandalism/Sabotage/TerrorismEconomic DisruptionSupply Chain DisruptionPandemic FluPerceived Inciden
Service disruption of source water, 
water or wastewater treatment 
system, storage system, 

distribution system, collection                   
system, communications, and 
electric power 
System contamination, including 
chemical, radiological, and 
biological, and problems 
associated with threatened                   
contamination, actual 
contamination, and perceived 
contamination.  
Damage to infrastructure systems                   
Environmental impacts to 

community                   
Loss of revenue, other serious 
economic disruption in the 
community, or loss of essential                   
supplies because contracts are 
voided or delivery is interrupted 
Denied or limited access to utility 
facilities and infrastructure; for 
 
example, if facilities are unsafe or                  
unreachable 
Loss of employees/contractors; for 
example, if roads are impassable, 
     
they are sick, or they are taking              
care of their family 
Loss of public confidence                   
Loss of SCADA systems                   
203 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Wildfires can also lead to water contamination. Wildfires can burn watersheds and destabilize the ground 
cover, which can lead to landslides. Subsequent rains can release contaminates into source waters that can 
impact water treatment operations. The 2012 wildfires in Colorado, which burned several thousand acres 
in previously forested watersheds, resulted in an increased concentration of contaminates in the water 
supply, leading to increased concentrations of disinfection by-products (DBPs) in the treated water 
[Writer et al., 2014; Rhoades, Entwistle, & Butler, 2011]. 
Many surface water impoundments serve a water supply function in addition to recreational and flood 
control purposes. Dam failure can present a secondary hazard in the wake of an earthquake, heavy 
rainfall, or flood event. Extreme precipitation and flooding can overtop and potentially compromise dam 
integrity. While these types of failures are rare, they may present a risk to the public and downstream 
infrastructure systems.  
16.2.1.2. Transmission 
Large diameter transmission pipelines carry raw water from the source to the treatment plant, and treated 
water to storage facilities before branching out into smaller distribution pipelines. Depending on the 
system, these pipelines can range nominally from 0.3 m to 10 m (1 ft to 30 ft) in diameter. Transmission 
pipelines are constructed of welded steel, reinforced concrete, or ductile iron (historically cast iron). 
Typically, transmission pipelines are buried, making 
inspections difficult and repairs both expensive and 
disruptive. Burial reduces pipeline vulnerability to 
some hazards, such as high wind events; however, 
hazards that cause landslides, such as earthquakes, 
floods, long-term rains, and wildfire, can also damage 
transmission lines. Figure 16-2 shows a transmission 
pipeline bridge damaged in Portland Oregon in a 
landslide event induced by heavy rains. 
16.2.1.3. Treatment 
Water treatment plants process raw water from 
groundwater or surface water supplies to meet public  
health water quality standards and often to improve Figure 16-2: Water transmission pipeline 
taste. The processes used depend on the raw water bridge damaged by landslide  
source, and the need to remove pathogens, organic or 
inorganic contaminants, chemicals, and turbidity. The 
treatment process commonly includes pretreatment, flocculation, sedimentation, filtration, and 
disinfection with variations of these processes in some modern plants. Water treatment plants typically 
consist of a number of process tanks, yard and plant piping, pumps, chemical storage and feed equipment, 
lab and office building space, and associated mechanical, electrical, and control equipment. 
Water treatment plants are vulnerable to flooding, because they are often located near flooding sources 
(i.e., lakes, rivers). Electrical control systems are often damaged by flood inundation, leading to loss of 
functionality and service outages. In 1993, the water treatment plant serving Des Moines was submerged 
by riverine flooding, resulting in 12 days without potable water for the city [McMullen, 1994].  
Loss of power at water treatment plants can prevent proper treatment and inhibit distribution [Thompson, 
2012; Morley, 2012]. As a result, potable water may not be available, making boil water notices 
necessary. Although standby power systems may be incorporated into a water treatment plant, they need 
204 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
to be well-maintained, tested regularly, and adequately connected, installed, supplied with fuel, and 
protected from hazard events to be reliable and function properly [AWWA, 2004].  
Earthquakes also damage water treatment plants and their components. In 1989, the Loma Prieta 
earthquake in California heavily damaged the clarifiers due to sloshing water at the water treatment plant 
in San Jose, California, greatly curtailing its 2.1 cubic meters per second, CMS (40 million gallons per 
day, MGD) capacity (Figure 16-3). In the 2011 Tohoku earthquake in Japan, liquefaction resulted in 
differential settlement between pile-supported structures and direct-buried pipe at water treatment plants 
(Figure 16-4). 
 
 
Figure 16-3: Santa Clara Valley Water District, Figure 16-4: Liquefaction caused differential 
water treatment plant clarifier launders damaged settlement between pile-supported structures and 
due to sloshing, 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake buried pipe during the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake  
16.2.1.4. Pumping 
Pumping stations increase hydraulic head by raising water to a higher elevation. A pump station typically 
consists of a simple building that houses pumps, motors, pipes, valves, and associated mechanical, 
electrical, and control equipment. Pump stations are primarily dependent on commercial power supply, 
but may have standby emergency generators to enable continued operation. 
Similar to water treatment plants, continued operation of pumps requires standby power if there is a loss 
of commercial electrical power. Furthermore, without operational pumps, floodwater can inundate 
electrical equipment and controls at pump stations located wholly or partially below grade in flood-prone 
areas.  
16.2.1.5. Storage 
Water utilities use water storage tanks and reservoirs for treated water to balance water demand with 
water production capacity. Water from these tanks and reservoirs are drawn down during times of peak 
usage and recharged during off-peak hours. Depending on the time of year and the demand period, stored 
water to satisfy increased demand for fire suppression or other emergency needs may be available from a 
few hours to 2-3 days. 
Modern steel storage tanks are either ground-supported, standpipes, or elevated tanks supported on a 
frame or pedestal. Reinforced concrete tanks are typically placed at grade or buried. Circular concrete 
tanks can be reinforced with metal reinforcement or tendons.  
205 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Storage tanks are vulnerable to a number of hazards. Elevated storage tanks are more susceptible to 
hazards from high winds than structures located at grade and can be damaged to the point of structural 
failure during wind or storm surge events. Figure 16-5 shows a collapsed water tank in Louisiana near 
Hurricane Katrinas landfall. The failure was likely caused by a combination of wind and storm surge 
effects. 
At-grade or partially-buried storage tanks may be susceptible to flood damage (from hurricane storm 
surge, riverine flooding, or tsunamis), particularly if located in or near flood-prone areas. Tank damage or 
failure can be caused by both hydrostatic forces from standing or slow moving water, or hydrodynamic 
forces imposed by higher velocity flows or wave action. Buoyancy forces can cause uplift of empty 
subgrade tanks if the soil becomes saturated. Figure 16-6 shows two liquid fuel tanks in the foreground 
that floated and were toppled by tsunami wave inundation after the 2011 Tohoku, Japan tsunami. The 
tank in the background was on higher ground and does not appear to have been damaged. 
  
Figure 16-5: Collapsed water tank in Buras, LA near Figure 16-6: Steel tanks damaged due to 
Hurricane Katrina landfall location [Source: FEMA] Tohoku, Japan Tsunami in 2011 
Lateral loads from shaking and permanent ground deformation due to ground liquefaction and landslides 
during earthquakes can damage storage tanks. Water sloshing in storage and process tanks during 
earthquakes can fail tank walls and baffles. In the 1994 Northridge earthquake, a Los Angeles water tank 
moved, severing piping, as shown in Figure 16-7. The utility north of Los Angeles suffered elephants 
foot buckling in a steel tank as shown in Figure 16-8.  
206 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
  
Figure 16-7: Tank moved, severing Figure 16-8: Steel tank elephants foot buckling in 1994 
connecting pipe in 1994 Northridge Northridge Earthquake 
Earthquake 
16.2.1.6. Distribution 
Smaller diameter distribution pipelines carry treated water from transmission pipelines to neighborhoods 
and to commercial and industrial areas. Service connections with meters branch off distribution pipelines 
to supply individual customers. The pipeline before the water meter is typically maintained by the water 
utility and pipeline after the water meter is the responsibility of the individual customer. The system is 
controlled with manually operated valves located at most pipeline intersections. Distribution systems have 
fire hydrants located at standardized increments, such as every 90 m (300 ft) or 150 m (500 ft) along a 
distribution pipeline. Distribution pipelines are commonly made with ductile iron (historically cast iron), 
welded steel, PVC, or asbestos cement. 
Leaks and breaks are two main concerns for distribution pipelines. Leak commonly refers to relatively 
minor damage to a pipe or joint that causes minor to moderate water loss, but does not significantly 
impair the distribution systems function. However, break commonly refers to major damage to a pipe 
barrel or joint that results in major water and pressure loss in a zone, or drains nearby tanks. When there 
are breaks in the water distribution system, they can lead to depressurization of the system. 
Depressurization can result in sediment accumulation within the pipelines affecting the potability of the 
water. Contamination and loss of potability means boil water orders should be issued. Before water can be 
considered potable again, the distribution systems must be repaired and the water quality monitored and 
tested to meet public health standards.  
Breaks of distribution pipelines can result from a number of hazards. Floods cause erosion, or scour, that 
expose and may possibly break pipelines (see Figure 16-9).  
Earthquakes can cause liquefaction or permanent ground deformation, causing pipeline breaks. In the 
1994 Northridge earthquake, the Los Angeles water infrastructure system experienced approximately 
1,000 pipeline breaks, primarily in cast iron pipe sections [Tanaka, 1995] due to very strong ground 
motions. A year later, the Kobe earthquake caused approximately 1,200 pipeline failures due to extensive 
liquefaction. Most of the system was constructed of ductile iron pipe, which primarily failed by joint 
separation as seen in Figure 16-10. 
207 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
  
Figure 16-9: Exposed (left) and broken(right) distribution lines resulting from flooding in Jamestown, 
CO [Source: Environmental Protection Agency] 
  
Figure 16-10: Ground cracking (left) and joint separation in ductile iron pipe (right) due to 
liquefaction during 1995 Kobe Earthquake  
Figure 16-10a (left) shows ground cracking due to liquefaction/lateral spreading in the Kobe Earthquake, 
1995. Figure 16-10b (right) shows separation of a ductile iron pipe joint in the ground crack. 
Wind events can result in damage to distribution lines by uprooted trees. For example, during Hurricane 
Andrew, there was extensive damage to the water distribution systems in Southern Florida primarily 
caused by tree roots that had grown around the water mains and service lines [Murphy, 1994]. When 
these trees were uprooted by hurricane force winds (Hurricane Andrew was a Category 5 on the Saffir-
Sampson scale when it made landfall in Dade County, Florida), the distribution system was damaged. 
Similar damage to water transmission and distribution systems occurred during Hurricanes Katrina and 
Rita in Louisiana [Allouche et al. 2006]. As stated above, no matter the cause of damage, pipeline breaks 
that depressurize the water system can lead to contamination through the pipelines and affect the 
potability of the water. One approach to address contamination concerns during the recovery process is to 
repair the pipelines; then, as pressure zone repairs are completed, disinfect the entire zone at one time.  
208 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
16.2.2. Wastewater Systems 
Wastewater systems collect domestic and industrial liquid waste products and convey them to treatment 
plants through collection and conveyance systems and pump stations. After separation of solids and 
biological processing and disinfection, treated wastewater is discharged as effluent into a receiving body 
of water or may be reused for irrigation or other purposes. Some utilities have separate collection systems 
for wastewater and storm water; other utilities have collection systems that combine collected wastewater 
and storm water in the same pipelines. 
Pipeline system failure can discharge raw sewage into basements, onto city streets, and into receiving 
waters, resulting in public health issues and environmental contamination. Standard wastewater systems 
are composed of five general categories of infrastructure: 1) collection, 2) conveyance, 3) pumping, 4) 
treatment, and 5) discharge. The subsections below briefly describe the basic function of each category. 
16.2.2.1. Collection and Conveyance 
The collection pipeline network for wastewater systems is similar to that for water systems. The 
wastewater collection system conveys liquid and other waste products away from customers to a 
treatment facility, instead of delivering water to individual customers. This is usually accomplished using 
gravity flows in sewers. The elevation and grade of the pipelines in the system need to be carefully 
controlled to maintain gravity flow in the system. In some instances, pumps convey wastewater through 
pressurized mains. Infiltration and inflow of groundwater into the collection system through cracks and 
breaks in the pipe can significantly increase the volume of wastewater that arrives at the treatment plant. 
A variety of pipe materials are commonly found in collection systems, including vitrified clay, reinforced 
concrete, PVC, brick and steel.  
Collection systems have manholes at regular intervals, allowing access for cleaning and maintenance. 
Manholes are usually constructed with concrete, although historically manholes were often constructed 
with brick.  
The conveyance system for the wastewater network is similar to the transmission system for a water 
system. Conveyance pipelines are larger in diameter, and are often deeper underground. The conveyance 
systems are designed to collect sewage from the collection system and move it to the wastewater 
treatment plant. Like collection systems, they may include pump stations. In many instances, these 
conveyance systems were installed in the early to mid-1900s as the  began to clean up its 
waterways. Many cities installed sewers that carried both sewage and storm water. Recently, the EPA is 
encouraging wastewater utilities to minimize discharge of raw sewage and to receive water runoff during 
heavy rain events. As a result, many conveyance systems now have storage capacity, taking the form of a 
wide point in the line and, in some cases, simplified wastewater treatment facilities. 
Wastewater collection and conveyance pipes have similar causes of damage to those of water distribution 
and transmission pipelines. Wastewater collection pipelines can be exposed and damaged because of 
landslides, erosion, or scour, which damages or breaks the pipelines. Furthermore, wastewater collection 
pipelines can be damaged in wind events by uprooted trees when root systems have grown around the 
pipelines. 
In the collection and conveyance system, pipelines can be damaged by earthquake effects of ground 
shaking, liquefaction, and lateral spreading. Sewer pipes can be damaged by shaking, which can cause 
joints to crack, but the system may remain operable. These cracks will ultimately have to be repaired to 
control infiltration. Liquefaction can result in separated joints and displaced pipe. Another cause of failure 
is pipe flotation, occurring when a partially-filled gravity sewer is surrounded by liquefied soil. 
209 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
In general, tunnels are resistant to earthquake damage as they are typically below the region where ground 
movement occurs. However, there have been instances where interior concrete tunnel liners have spalled 
as a result of earthquake forces. Tunnel portals are also vulnerable to damage by landslides. 
Flooding can also damage wastewater collection pipelines in a number of ways. Pipelines that are co-
located on bridges can experience damage caused by flood inundation and flood-borne debris impact. 
Hydrodynamic forces associated with coastal flooding or high velocity flows are more likely to damage 
structures and attached pipelines than inundation alone. In the New Orleans area after Hurricane Katrina, 
the most common damage to buried wastewater pipelines observed by clean-up crews was separation of 
pipe joints, leaks, and breaks. This damage was believed to be the result of floodwaters supersaturating 
soils, followed by drainage that led to soil shrinkage and subsidence. Without support of the surrounding 
soils, the pipelines broke and fractured [Chisolm and Matthews 2012]. Increased flow and pressurization 
of the wastewater collection systems can occur during flood events. Inflow and water infiltration through 
cracks may damage pipelines, particularly in cases where pipes are composed of materials such as 
vitrified clay. For example, during the 1997 Red River Flood in Grand Forks, North Dakota, 
pressurization caused breaking of vitrified clay pipe and hairline cracks increased the rate of overall pipe 
deterioration [Chisolm and Matthews 2012]. 
16.2.2.2. Pumping 
Gravity feed systems use pump stations to transfer wastewater to a higher elevation. The pump station 
may discharge wastewater at the higher elevation to another section of a gravity pipeline, or the 
wastewater may remain in a pressurized main pipeline and be discharged at another location, such as a 
treatment plant. A pump station typically consists of a simple building that houses pumps, motors, pipes, 
and associated mechanical, electrical, and control equipment. The pumps can be located in a building 
(typically a wetwell-drywell layout) or a large manhole (submersible). Many pump stations have standby 
generators, and plugs for quick connection of portable generators to enable continued operation when the 
commercial power supply is interrupted. 
Pump stations are vulnerable to a number of hazards, including earthquakes and flooding. Unless 
designed to be submersible, floodwater that inundates the pumps can disable and damage them and their 
motors. This was a common cause of pump station failure in New York City during flood inundation 
from Hurricane Sandy [NYCDEP 2013]. Damage can be worse with salt water flooding, as it leads to 
widespread corrosion.  
Loss of commercial electrical power prevents operation of pumps if adequate standby power is not 
provided or the generators are not refueled in a timely manner. Earthquakes can cause liquefaction, 
causing buried wastewater collection wells at pump stations to float and tilt. This movement damages 
connected piping and renders the pump station inoperable. Manholes and pump stations are also 
susceptible to floating if surrounding soils are liquefied. Displacements that change the grade can make 
the pump station unusable or difficult to maintain.  
16.2.2.3. Treatment 
Wastewater treatment plants process raw sewage from residential, commercial sources, and in some cases 
specialized treatment operations for industrial sources. The wastewater facility effluent (e.g., treated or 
untreated wastewater that flows out of a treatment plant), must meet public health and environmental 
standards. The typical process is:  
1. Pretreatment using screens and grit chambers 
2. Primary treatment in a sedimentation tank  
210 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
3. Secondary treatment using biological treatment and clarifiers 
4. Disinfection using chlorine or other disinfectants.  
In some cases, the effluent is further treated for irrigation uses. Solids drawn off from the four processes 
are treated in digesters and solidified using presses or centrifuges. These processes require an extensive 
mechanical and electrical equipment and piping. 
Wastewater treatment plants are susceptible to damage from several natural hazards, particularly flooding. 
With the projected sea level rise continuing through the 21st century, the frequency of flooding in 
treatment plants will likely increase. Wastewater treatment plants are often located in or near flood-prone 
areas because they return treated water to naturally occurring bodies of water. Therefore, they can be 
vulnerable to flood inundation or storm surge and wave action from coastal sources that may cause 
damage and loss of functionality to buildings, equipment, and electrical and mechanical systems. The 
New York City Department of Environmental Protection (NYCDEP) noted in a recent study that all 14 of 
the wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) it owns and operates are at risk of flood damage [NYCDEP 
2013].  
WWTPs in non-coastal regions of the  are often located adjacent to rivers, which has 
resulted in recent examples of WWTP riverine flooding: 1) nine days of lost functionality due to flooding 
of Valdosta, Georgia WWTP in 2009; 2) flooding of the Pawtuxet River WWTP in Warwick, Rhode 
Island in 2010; and 3) shut down of the Palmyra, Indiana WWTP in 2011 due to rising water levels.  
In areas where wastewater treatment facilities are elevated or protected by levees, flooding can still lead 
to access issues. While the treatment facility itself may not be inundated, flooding around the facility can 
limit both ingress and egress of vital staff. For several WWTPs along the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers 
during 1993 floods, personnel access was only possible by boat and roads inundated by the flood were not 
considered stable enough for larger vehicles, such as those carrying supplies for the plants [Sanders, 
1997]. 
Release of untreated sewage is relatively common during major flood events when inflow and infiltration 
can overtax wastewater collection systems or when there are combined sewer overflows. During 
Hurricane Sandy, over 560 million gallons of untreated and diluted sewage, mixed with storm water and 
seawater, was released into waterways. This sewage release was caused by infiltration of floodwaters into 
the sewer system, flood inundation of plant facilities, and power outages [NYCDEP 2013]. Electronic 
controls were inundated and damaged in many wastewater treatment facilities, which significantly 
delayed the facilities recovery times [FEMA 2013]. Similarly, after Hurricane Rita in 2005, the City of 
Lake Charles had a citywide power loss that affected the wastewater treatment plant serving two-thirds of 
the city. Raw sewage was released into a nearby lake for over a week, until power was restored.  
While discharge or raw sewage contaminates the receiving water, chemical contamination of sewage can 
impact the WWTP treatment process itself. For example, in the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake in 
California, the East Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD) WWTP biological treatment process failed 
when a spill in the collection system contaminated the treatment plant influent. Coupled with the spill, the 
plant lost power and was unable to pump oxygen into the treatment system, resulting in the secondary 
treatment system being inoperable for several weeks. 
WWTPs are typically at a low point in the elevation of the system. Though flooding from hazard events is 
a primary concern, earthquakes can damage facilities through ground shaking, permanent ground 
deformation, and liquefaction. Ground shaking is particularly problematic for process tanks and digesters 
when sloshing sewage impacts the tank walls. Permanent ground deformation induced by liquefaction 
often causes joint separation in process tanks and damage to pipelines and pipe racks. Even if treatment 
structures are pile-supported, buried piping can settle differentially and break. In the 2011 Christchurch 
earthquake in New Zealand, clarifiers settled differentially, rendering them inoperable. In the 1995 Kobe 
Earthquake, the Higashinada WWTP site settled differentially up to one meter and moved laterally up to 
211 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
two meters due to liquefaction that heavily damaging non-pile-supported structures. The resulting damage 
is shown in Figure 16-11. Figure 16-12 shows the Higashinada influent channel that was offset one meter 
by liquefaction during the 1995 Kobe earthquake. 
  
Figure 16-11: Non-pile supported structures failed due Figure 16-12: Higashinda WWTP Channel 
to liquefaction in 1995 Kobe Earthquake.  offset by liquefaction in 1995 Kobe 
Earthquake 
Strong earthquakes can produce tsunamis that can inundate facilities, structurally damage treatment plant 
facilities by lateral hydraulic loading, and damage electrical gear. The 2011 Tohoku earthquake in Japan 
caused heavy damage to the Sendai WWTP Effluent Pump Stations east wall, as shown in Figure 16-13. 
Much of the process tank equipment required replacement because of the large amount of damage, as 
shown in Figure 16-14.  
  
Figure 16-13: Sendai WWTP Effluent Figure 16-14: Sendai WWTP equipment and piping 
Pump Station damaged by Tsunami in 2011 damage from the 2011 earthquake 
Tohoku Earthquake  
212 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
16.2.2.4. Discharge 
Effluent from a treatment plant is discharged to a receiving body of water through an outfall. Outfalls are 
composed of a pipeline with a diffuser at the end to discharge the water hundreds or thousands of feet 
away from the shoreline, at a depth that will minimize impact on the environment. 
16.3. Performance Goals 
The large and distributed nature of water and wastewater systems, combined with their dependence on 
other infrastructure systems, reduces the likelihood of a fully operational system in the aftermath of an 
extreme hazard event. This section provides example performance goals tables for community water and 
wastewater systems (Table 16-2 and Table 16-3). 
Performance goals need to be developed using input from individual utilities and stakeholders before they 
are adopted. It is important to consider the uniqueness of the infrastructure of individual utilities and the 
specific needs of their customers when adopting system performance goals for a community. Water and 
wastewater stakeholder engagement is critical in establishing a community-specific level of service 
performance goals for each of the three different hazard levels (routine, design, and extreme) defined in 
Chapter 4 (Volume I). The group of involved stakeholders should include representation from the 
following organizations, as applicable: 
x Residential customers 
x Business owners  
x Industry representatives  
x Water wholesale customers  
x Hospital representatives  
x Fire department officials and crew 
x Local government officials 
x Local emergency management officials 
x Drinking water regulators (Health Authority, etc.) 
x Wastewater regulators (Dept. of Environmental Quality, Environmental Protection Agency, etc.) 
x Water and wastewater utility operators and engineers 
x Consulting engineers 
x Interdependent infrastructure system operators (power, liquid fuel, transportation, etc.) 
Establishing performance goals involves discussion among stakeholders about expectations for 
availability of water and wastewater systems following a hazard event in the short, intermediate, and long 
term phases for different hazard levels (e.g., routine, design, and extreme). The publics assumed 
expectation is that for routine hazard events there will be little, if any, interruption of service for water 
and wastewater lifelines. A dialogue is required between utilities and customers to determine the 
appropriate service performance goals for design and extreme events. An example matrix that can be 
populated for water and wastewater systems is provided in Table 16-2 and Table 16-3. There may be 
variability for an individual communitys goals depending on the specific hazard being addressed.  
213 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Table 16-2: Example water infrastructure performance goals table to be filled out by community and 
its stakeholders  
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Any  30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine, Design, Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized, Community, Regional   90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual, Moderate, Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Overall Recovery Time for Hazard  Routine, Expected or Extreme 
Phase 1  Short-Phase 2 -- Phase 3  Long-
Support 
Functional Category: Cluster Term Intermediate Term 
Needed4 Days Wks Mos 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Source 
Raw or source water and terminal reservoirs           
Raw water conveyance (pump stations and piping 
          
to WTP) 
Water Production           
Well and/or Treatment operations functional           
Transmission (including Booster Stations) 
Backbone transmission facilities (pipelines, pump 
          
stations, and tanks) 
Water for fire suppression at key supply points (to 
          
promote redundancy) 
Control Systems 
SCADA or other control systems           
Distribution 
Critical Facilities  
Wholesale Users (other communities, rural water 
          
districts) 
Hospitals, EOC, Police Station, Fire Stations           
Emergency Housing 
Emergency Shelters           
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Potable water available at community distribution 
          
centers 
Water for fire suppression at fire hydrants           
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
All other clusters           
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90 % restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
214 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Table 16-3: Example wastewater infrastructure performance goals table to be filled out by community 
and its stakeholders 
Disturbance 1  Restoration Levels 2,3 
Hazard Type Any   30% Function Restored 
Hazard Level  Routine, Design, Extreme  60% Function Restored 
Affected Area Localized, Community, Regional   90% Function Restored 
Disruption Level Usual, Moderate, Severe  X Anticipated Performance 
 
Design Hazard Performance 
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 
Support 
Functional Category: Cluster -Term Intermediate Long-Term 
Needed4Short
 
Days Weeks Months 
0 1 1-3 1-4 4-8 8-12 4 4-24 24+ 
Treatment Plants 
Treatment plants operating with primary 
          
treatment and disinfection 
Treatment plants operating to meet regulatory 
          
requirements 
Trunk Lines 
Backbone collection facilities (major trunk line, 
pump stations, siphons, relief mains, aerial           
crossings) 
Flow equalization basins           
Control Systems 
SCADA and other control systems           
Collection Lines 
Critical Facilities  
Hospitals, EOC, Police Station, Fire Stations           
Emergency Housing 
Emergency Shelters           
Housing/Neighborhoods 
Threats to public health and safety controlled by 
containing & routing raw sewage away from           
public 
Community Recovery Infrastructure  
All other clusters           
Footnotes: 
1 Specify hazard type being considered 
Specify hazard level  Routine, Design, Extreme 
 Specify the anticipated size of the area affected  Local, Community, Regional 
 Specify anticipated severity of disruption  Minor, Moderate, Severe 
 2 30% 60% 90% Desired restoration times for percentage of elements within the cluster 
3 X Anticipated performance for 90 % restoration of cluster for existing buildings and infrastructure systems  
  Cluster recovery times will be shown on the Summary Matrix 
4 Indicate levels of support anticipated by plan 
 R = Regional; S= State; MS=Multi-State; C = Civil (Corporate/Local) 
The community may or may not have control over the post-hazard event performance of its water and 
wastewater infrastructure systems. If the community owns the systems, it has direct control and can make 
improvements as it sees fit. If a community has partial ownership (e.g., a regional system), performance 
goals for the facilities could be developed and negotiated with the other owners. If the system is privately 
owned, the community can include the owner as a stakeholder and work to develop performance goals 
and solutions that are acceptable to both. System resilience improvements may require consideration of 
increased rates.  
There may be elements in a system so critical to public safety that they need to be designed to remain 
operational after an extreme event. For example, failure of a water supply impoundment dam might 
present a significant life-safety hazard to downstream residents.  
215 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Dependencies of water and wastewater systems on other infrastructure systems also need to be considered 
when developing performance goals. For instance, availability of a reliable supply of liquid fuel is 
essential for standby generators and vehicles and equipment used by repair crews. In turn, delivery of 
liquid fuels depends on the status of the highway and bridge transportation network. 
Performance goals are developed for water and wastewater systems as functional categories (i.e., water 
for fire suppression at key supply points, treatment plants operating to meet regulatory requirements). The 
desired performance goals are recorded as target timelines to restore the system function in stages, 
indicated by 30 %, 60 %, and 90 % operational status.  
Service quality is a key aspect for drinking water service, given tradeoffs between quantity and quality 
during emergency situations. A utility may be able to distribute water to support fire suppression, but may 
need to issue a boil water advisory to protect public health. Water quality is always desired, but can be 
compromised under emergency conditions. Anticipated performance of these systems needs to account 
for their existing condition and operational procedures of the treatment plants and distribution systems. 
Water quality is typically communicated to the public [CDC/EPA/AWWA 2013] as follows:  
x Boil Water Notice  Okay for contact, but boil before consumption and cooking 
x Do Not Drink  Okay for contact, but no consumption 
x Do Not Use  No contact or consumption, fire protection may be compromised 
The infrastructure components in the example performance goals tables are not intended to be an 
exhaustive list. Some system components may not exist in a community. For instance, some communities 
may have the ability to distinguish between the general water supply and distribution and water supply for 
fire suppression. However, most community water systems are integrated and do not separate general 
supply and distribution from a water supply for fire suppression. Additionally, some community water 
systems might supply treated water to wholesale users, such as a nearby suburban or rural community. 
Wholesale users are treated as a critical part of the distribution system within the example, but are not a 
consideration for all communities. Each community will need to review these components to determine 
which ones to incorporate into their systems, or if other functions and components need to be added, such 
as planning options for providing emergency water supply to the community and for specific functions, 
such as hospitals and health care facilities [CDC/AWWA 2012; EPA 2011]. 
Community resilience is developed over time, according to the desired performance goals and 
implementation plans of each community. Community plans that include the following considerations are 
more likely to satisfy all stakeholders: 
x Prioritize potential solutions to be implemented over years to limit disruptions and recovery time 
rather than planning to implement them all at once 
x Recognize that both short- and long-term solutions may improve recovery times 
x Balance societal needs with realistic expectations of system performance 
Focusing on major system components that form a backbone network capable of supplying key health and 
safety-related community needs shortly after a hazard event is one way to focus priorities. When the 
community begins to estimate the cost of implementation for short and long term solutions, it may decide 
to reassess the desired performance goals.  
216 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
16.4. Regulatory Environment 
16.4.1. Federal and State Primacy 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) establishes requirements for drinking water quality 
under authority of the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA [42 U.S.C. et seq. 300f-300j]) and for wastewater 
effluent quality under authority of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 
et seq. 1251-1387). A state agency that meets certain criteria may be granted primacy to oversee and 
implement these requirements.  
SDWA Example Requirements 
x Filtration of surface water supplies, except in some cases special treatment of particularly clean 
surface water supplies 
x Disinfection of supplies (except a few groundwater supplies) 
x Covering of treated water storage 
x Community water systems serving population greater than 3300 are required to perform 
vulnerability assessment and develop emergency response plans 
x State primacy agencies are to develop and implement plans for the provision of safe drinking 
water under emergency circumstances including earthquakes, floods, hurricanes, and other 
natural hazards, as appropriate 
Clean Water Act Example Requirements 
x Secondary treatment of wastewater discharges 
x Disinfection of wastewater discharges 
x Systems critical to maintaining discharge compliance are required to have emergency power  
16.4.2. Other State  
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA [42 USC  11001-11050]). 
Facilities that store, use, or release certain chemicals may be subject to reporting requirements to state 
and/or local agencies through EPCRA. Information in reports becomes publically available. Treatment 
chemicals stored and used at water treatment plants often require this type of reporting. 
Planning Requirements. Water and wastewater planning and design requirements are generally 
controlled by states and local governments. States typically require that comprehensive plans for water 
and wastewater system be prepared on a regular basis to assess future system needs (e.g., capacity) and 
how those needs will be met. The elements of those comprehensive plans are defined by the state. Often, 
these plans include requirements to identify the hazards that the system could be subjected and how the 
utility will address those hazards. These are typically quite general in nature and do not include detailed 
design criteria. 
16.5. Codes and Standards 
State and local governments adopt model building codes, such as the International Building Code (IBC). 
Model building codes rely heavily on standards, such ASCE-7, Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and 
Other Structures. In many cases, a state will adopt these model codes; in some cases, local jurisdictions 
adopt and modify them to suit their needs. The IBC and ASCE-7 focus on buildings and structures. State 
217 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
and local agencies may also have special requirements for high-risk facilities, such as dams. The Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) controls designs of hydroelectric generating dams. 
Design codes, such as the IBC, are updated regularly, taking into account performance of facilities since 
the last code was issued, research, and other developments in the building industry. Once finalized, they 
are voted on by the code committee and can be adopted by state or local jurisdictions.  
The following subsections discuss some codes, standards, and guidelines that are important to the 
resilience of water and wastewater infrastructure, the anticipated performance of the infrastructure after a 
design hazard event, and the long-term recovery levels of the infrastructure when damage occurs.  
16.5.1. New Construction 
Design Standards. Design standards are often developed according to an ANSI-based consensus process 
and voluntarily adopted by various organizations. Committee membership includes representation from 
key stakeholders. In some cases design standards are referenced by the building code. In other cases, they 
can be used by utilities on a project-by-project basis. There are two organizations with design standards 
that are relevant to natural hazard impacts on the water and wastewater industry: 
x American Concrete Institute  standards addressing concrete process tanks, such as ACI 350-06  
x American Water Works Association (AWWA)   
 Standards addressing design of water storage tanks, such as AWWA D100 [2011], D110 
(2013), D115 (2006), addressing seismic design of water storage tanks 
 Standard AWWA-J100, Risk and Resilience Management of Water and Wastewater Systems 
[AWWA 2010], addressing performance of water and wastewater systems when subjected to 
natural and human-caused hazards 
AWWA has other standards addressing pipeline design and water quality, but none of these standards 
addresses natural hazards. 
There are no design standards for underground pipelines in water and wastewater systems, or standards 
that address design for earthquake, landslide, or flood hazards. Often the Chief Engineer of a utility is 
responsible for establishing its design practices and criteria. While agency-specific design practices may 
follow industry recommendations, they are not consistent between systems and may have varying levels 
of reliability. 
For example, the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC) developed its own internal 
standard that outlines performance goals for the desired level of service following a major Bay Area 
earthquake and identifies specific requirements for the design and retrofit of aboveground and 
underground infrastructure. The SFPUC Engineering Standard, General Seismic Requirements for Design 
of New Facilities and Upgrade of Existing Facilities [SFPUC, 2006], establishes design criteria that, in 
many cases, are more stringent than building codes or industry standards. The design standard supports 
the SFPUC performance goal to achieve a basic level of service to their wholesale customers within 24 
hours after a design earthquake. 
Guidelines and Manuals of Practice. A number of organizations have developed guidelines for use by 
the industry. Guidelines often offer examples of how a standard may be applied or present operational 
context for a given best practice. Guidelines and manuals may not receive the same level of consensus or 
public review as a standard, but are generally representative of industry norms. Table 16-4 lists some 
codes, standards, and guidance documents applicable to water and wastewater infrastructure systems with 
regard to community resilience. The table includes a matrix of system components addressed in the 
reference. This list is not intended to be exhaustive.  
218 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Table 16-4: Codes, standards, and guidelines related to resilience at drinking water and wastewater 
facilities 
 
Org Name  
  
  
Category (1)GeneralPipelinesPumpingStorageTreatment
IBC C 2012 International Building Code or applicable jurisdictional building code          
ASCE S ASCE 7 Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures      
ACI S 350 Code Requirements for Environmental Engineering Concrete Structures          
ACI S 371R-08 Guide for the Analysis, Design, and Construction of Elevated Concrete and          
Composite Steel-Concrete Water Storage Tanks 
ACI S 372R-03 Design and Construction of Circular Wire- and Strand-Wrapped         
Prestressed Concrete Structures 
AWWA S D100-11 Welded Carbon Steel Tanks for Water Storage          
AWWA S D110-13 Wire- and Strand-Wound, Circular, Prestressed Concrete Tanks          
AWWA S D115-06 Tendon-Prestressed Concrete Water Tanks          
AWWA S G100-11 Water Treatment Plant Operation and Management      
AWWA S G430-14 Security Practices for Operation and Management          
AWWA S G440-11 Emergency Preparedness Practices      
AWWA S J100-10 Risk and Resilience Management of Water and Wastewater Systems          
ALA G Guidelines for Implementing Performance Assessments of Water Systems          
ALA G Guidelines for the Design of Buried Steel Pipe (2001)          
ALA G Seismic Design and Retrofit of Piping Systems (2002)         
ALA G Seismic Fragility Formulations for Water Systems (2001)          
ALA G Seismic Guidelines for Water Pipelines (2005)          
ALA G Wastewater System Performance Assessment Guideline (2004)          
ASCE G Guidelines for Seismic Design of Oil and Gas Pipeline Systems (1984)          
AWWA G Emergency Power Source Planning for Water and Wastewater      
AWWA G M9 Concrete Pressure Pipe          
AWWA G M11 Steel Pipe: A Guide for Design and Installation          
AWWA G M19 Emergency Planning for Water Utilities (2001)          
AWWA G M60 Drought Preparedness and Response          
AWWA G Minimizing Earthquake Damage, A Guide for Water Utilities (1994)          
EPA / AWWA G Planning for an Emergency Drinking Water Supply      
MCEER G MCEER-08-0009 Fragility Analysis of Water Supply Systems (2008)          
MCEER G Monograph Series No. 3 Response of Buried Pipelines Subject to Earthquakes          
MCEER G Monograph Series No. 4 Seismic Design of Buried and Offshore Pipelines          
TCLEE G Monograph 15 Guidelines for the Seismic Evaluation and Upgrade of Water          
Transmission Facilities (1999) 
TCLEE G Monograph 22 Seismic Screening Checklists for Water and Wastewater Facilities          
(2002) 
WEF G Emergency Planning, Response, and Recovery          
WEF G Guide for Municipal Wet Weather Strategies          
WEF G MOP 28 Upgrading and Retrofitting Water and Wastewater Treatment Plants          
WEF G MOP 8 Design of Municipal Wastewater Treatment Plants          
WEF G MOP FD-17 Prevention and Control of Sewer System Overflows          
WRF / AWWA / G Business Continuity Planning for Water Utilities      
EPA 
(1) C  Code; S  Standard; G  Guideline or Manual of Practice (MOP) 
219 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
16.5.1.1. Implied or Stated Performance Levels for Expected Hazard Levels 
Design of new aboveground structures (treatment plant office and lab buildings, pump stations, process 
tanks, water storage tanks and reservoirs, etc.) is typically governed by local building codes or design 
standards. Design loads are prescribed by a consensus-based standard, ASCE Standard 7 Minimum 
Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures [ASCE 2010]. This standard uses the concept of Risk 
Category to increase the design loads for important structures. Typical buildings are designed for Risk 
Category II. Water and wastewater treatment facilities are assigned to Risk Category III, which includes 
facilities that may disrupt civilian life or potentially cause public health risks. Water storage facilities and 
pump stations required to maintain water pressure for fire suppression systems are assigned to the highest 
category, Risk Category IV.  
The building code intends that structures designed as Risk Category III or IV remain operational or 
require only minor repairs to remain operational following a design level hazard event. By designing for a 
design level event, water and wastewater systems should remain operational under a routine level event 
but may experience moderate to major damage during an extreme level event. 
16.5.2. Existing Construction 
16.5.2.1. Implied or Stated Performance Levels for Expected Hazard Levels 
Design criteria for seismic hazards continue to be refined as the engineering and seismology communitys 
understanding of U.S. seismicity improves. A significant portion of water and wastewater system 
components in the high seismicity regions of the western and central U.S. were designed and constructed 
for a lower seismic hazard than specified by current codes and standards. 
Anticipated performance of water and wastewater system components during earthquakes is dependent on 
the hazard level, codes and standards used in the original design, and the type of structure. System 
components built prior to the mid-1970s may perform poorly in earthquakes because our understanding of 
structures behaviors during earthquakes was not as advanced as it is now. However, some categories of 
structures, such as single story concrete shear wall-type structures, are inherently robust and are likely to 
perform well during a design event. Performance of system components built between the mid-1970s and 
early 2000s is dependent on the code/standard edition, the seismic loads used in design, and the type of 
structure. Structures that satisfy the benchmark building criteria of ASCE 41-13 and are in areas that have 
not seen significant increases in seismic loads are generally anticipated to perform similarly to new 
construction as previously described. System components built after the early 2000s are also generally 
anticipated to perform similarly to new construction as previously described.  
Anticipated performance of nonstructural components should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, as 
engineers now pay closer attention to seismic design and construction of nonstructural components.  
Anticipated performance of pipelines should be evaluated on a system-by-system basis because 
performance of pipelines is dependent on pipe type, joint type, and earthquake ground movement 
parameters. Even today, there is no code or standard for seismic design of pipelines. 
16.5.2.2. Recovery Levels 
There are a number of hazard events that have rendered utilities non-functional for weeks that have 
illustrated the importance of considering the dependencies of water and wastewater systems on other 
systems of the built environment. A few notable events and their recovery levels are given in the 
following: 
220 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Great Flood of 1993. In the Great Flood of 1993, the Raccoon River overtopped its banks and submerged 
the Des Moines, Iowa WTP [McMullen 1994]. The water receded and the plant restored non-potable 
water within 12 days and potable water within 19 days [McMullen 1994]. The water outage disrupted 
restaurant and hotel operations. The Principal Insurance Company headquarters had trucks deliver water 
and pumped it into the building to cool computers. AT&Ts regional central office nearly lost phone 
service because of computer cooling issues. 
Northridge and Kobe Earthquakes. In the 1994 Northridge earthquake, the Los Angeles water 
distribution system suffered approximately 1000 pipeline failures, primarily in the San Fernando Valley 
(Davis 2014). With mutual aid, they were able to fully restore potable water service to everyone within 12 
days. A year later, the 1995 Kobe Japan earthquake caused 1200 pipeline failures resulting in lost service 
to all households for up to 60 days [NIST 1996]. 
Hurricane Katrina. The August 29, 2005 Category 4 storm caused levee failures that resulted in 
inundation of approximately 80 % of New Orleans, including flood damage to their water and wastewater 
treatment plants [Black & Veatch Corporation 2006]. The interruption of water and sewage service, and 
reduced demand due to evacuated customers who never returned, resulted in a substantial reduction in 
revenues. In 2012 it was estimated that the population of New Orleans was only 76 % of its population in 
2000. Water for fire suppression was restored in one week. Potable water was restored by city blocks: 1 
month plus to restore service to the East Bank west of the Industrial Canal, three months plus to restore 
service the East Bank east of the Industrial Canal, and over nine months to restore service to a portion of 
the Lower 9th Ward [Black & Veatch Corporation 2006].  
Christchurch, New Zealand and Tohoku, Japan Earthquakes. The recent 2011 Christchurch New 
Zealand, and Tohoku Japan earthquakes both resulted in outages of potable water lasting in excess of 40 
days [G&E Engineering Systems Inc., 2012]. Impacted Japanese cities were assisted by mutual aid from 
cities in western Japan. 
16.6. Strategies for Implementing Plans for Community Resilience 
This section uses information from Sections 16.2 through 16.5 to provide guidance on the process of 
assessing water and wastewater infrastructure, defining solutions to improve infrastructure resilience, and 
narrowing resilience gaps. 
16.6.1. System Assessment Approaches 
The purpose of the assessment is to quantify the anticipated performance and recovery of the overall 
system and determine whether it meets the performance goals (Section 16.3). If the system does not meet 
the desired performance objectives, the assessment may identify system deficiencies that, if improved, 
may help achieve the desired performance goals. The assessment will likely require coordination and 
collaboration with other infrastructure systems to address dependencies.  
Section 16.2 described the basic components of water and wastewater systems and gave examples of 
observed failures in past hazards. System performance is highly dependent on the existing condition of 
the system and the design criteria, including codes and standards. Information about past performance of 
similar systems, combined with knowledge of the existing condition and design basis, help a utility 
estimate the anticipated level of service that could be provided after a hazard event.  
There may be a gap between the level of service a system can provide if a hazard event occurred today 
and the desired community performance goals. It is likely the capital expenditure required to close this 
performance gap exceeds the short-term capital improvement project budgets of the utility. However, the 
resilience of any system can be improved incrementally over time by appropriately considering design 
criteria to reduce the impact of hazards in new and upgraded infrastructure systems. To estimate the level 
221 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
of service a water or wastewater system could provide after a given hazard event, an assessment of 
anticipated damage to the system and restoration sequences and times is required. Several methodologies 
and tools are available to conduct these assessments, a few of which are described below. While loss 
estimation has progressed over the past 20 years, the results are still estimates. These estimates can be 
useful for comparison of alternatives. 
Hazus-MH. Hazus-MH is a multi-hazard (flood, earthquake, and hurricane) loss estimation tool 
developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for use in mitigation, emergency 
preparedness, and response and recovery planning [FEMA 2012]. Communities can use this tool to 
characterize their hazard exposure, estimate losses to the water and wastewater systems, and estimate 
repair costs and duration. It may also be used to inform an AWWA J100 analysis, as discussed below. 
ANSI/AWWA J100-10. The Standard for Risk and Resilience Management of Water and Wastewater 
Systems [AWWA 2010] provides a methodology for conducting a multi-hazard system risk and resilience 
assessments. The J100 standard aligns the national homeland security objectives in Homeland Security 
Presidential Directive/HSPD-5 [DHS 2003], PPD-8 [2011], PPD-21 [2013] and Executive Order (EO) 
13636 [the White House 2013b]. The J100-10 standard consists of a seven-step process for analyzing and 
supporting management decisions that maximize risk reduction and/or enhance resilience at the utility and 
the community it serves. 
1. Asset characterization 
2. Threat characterization 
3. Consequence analysis 
4. Vulnerability analysis 
5. Threat analysis 
6. Risk/Resilience analysis 
7. Risk/Resilience management 
Determining asset level resilience for specific threats is part of the assessment methodology, and may 
support a communitys process for determining desired performance goals and anticipated performance 
(Section 16.3). The J100 standard also includes a Utility Resilience Index (URI), a system-level 
assessment of operational and financial indicators. The URI can serve as a benchmark to evaluate 
potential resilience improvement projects and as a measure to track a utilitys progress over time towards 
achieving resilience performance goals. 
One approach to assess financial impacts is to quantify loss of function in terms of value per unit of 
service, dollars per person per day. This can be estimated by quantifying the number of customers in the 
area without service and the time it takes to restore service to the area. For example, if a pressure zone 
serving 1,000 people loses service for 5 days, the result is 5 days  1,000 people or 5,000 person days. 
FEMA currently allows $103/day per person for loss of service. So 5,000 person days  $103/day/person 
= $515,000. If applying for a FEMA Hazard Mitigation Grant, this can be used as an avoided loss in a 
benefit/cost analysis for a project that would reduce the outage time to zero days. 
VSAT, PARRE, and WHEAT. Several tools have been developed to support water utility assessment of 
risks. The Vulnerability Self-Assessment Tool (VSAT [EPA 2014]) and the Program for Analysis of Risk 
and Resiliency Evaluation (PARRE [Binning, 2014]) have been designed to assist water and wastewater 
utilities application of the J100 standard. VSAT is complemented by the Water Health and Economic 
Analysis Tool (WHEAT), which quantifies three consequences associated with a hazard event: 1) public 
health impact, 2) utility-level financial impact, and 3) direct and indirect regional economic impact [EPA 
2014]. WHEAT is specifically aligned with step 3 (consequence analysis) of the J100 standard.  
222 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
EPA. The EPAs National Homeland Security Research Center (NHSRC) also supports efforts to 
enhance utility resilience. Collaboration with AWWA resulted in the development of Planning for an 
Emergency Drinking Water Supply [EPA 2011], which directly supports a capability assessment based on 
threats in the J100 standard to maintain service. 
These resilience assessment approaches need to be evaluated and refined into a consistent methodology 
prior to implementation. An example of an earthquake resilience assessment procedure for a water system 
is outlined in the following section. 
16.6.1.1. Example Earthquake Resilience Assessment 
x Identify the appropriate earthquake scenario or scenarios. Develop or obtain ground motion 
information for each. The USGS has scenarios available for a suite of earthquakes in the U.S. 
Obtain liquefaction and landslide hazard maps available from the state department of geology. 
Use GIS for all mapping. 
For buried pipelines: 
x Compile an inventory of system pipelines including pipe material, joint type, and length. 
x In GIS, superimpose the pipeline distribution system onto maps of the scenario hazard (peak 
ground velocity, liquefaction potential, and landslide potential).  
x Use empirical relationships developed by the American Lifelines Alliance (ALA) to predict the 
number of breaks and leaks in the pipeline system.  
x Estimate the time required to repair the predicted number of breaks and leaks based on historical 
crew productivity data and restore system functionality. Consider the anticipated damage states of 
dependent systems (transportation, liquid fuel, etc.). 
For aboveground infrastructure: 
x Compile an inventory of system components (tanks, pump stations, treatment plants, etc.), 
including type of construction, date of original construction, and any subsequent retrofits. 
x Estimate the level of damage predicted for the aboveground water system components based on 
observations from past earthquakes, the seismic hazard used at the time of original construction 
or retrofit, and the professional judgment of engineers knowledgeable in the seismic performance 
of water systems. Use fragility curves found in Hazus-MH to determine the anticipated 
performance for a particular facility type for a given ground motion. 
x Estimate the time required to repair the predicted damage to aboveground infrastructure and 
restore system functionality. Consider the anticipated damage states of dependent systems 
(transportation, liquid fuel, etc.). 
For the system: 
x Determine the anticipated system performance based on the damage to pipelines and facilities. 
x Determine the anticipated time for recovery of function for the system, including buried pipelines 
and aboveground infrastructure. 
x Compare the estimate of time for recovery of function to the desired performance goals 
established by the community. 
Note that recovery time for utilities that purchase water from wholesale suppliers is highly dependent on 
the recovery time of the supplying utility. Wholesale water suppliers need to work with their customers to 
assess the anticipated damage and restorations times from the source to the final individual customers. In 
223 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
this case, water and wastewater system resilience assessments may require a regional approach to 
characterize the anticipated performance of the system of systems in a hazard event appropriately. 
16.6.2. Solutions to Improve System Performance 
16.6.2.1. General Considerations 
The system assessment described in the previous section may identify system deficiencies, inadequate 
performance of system components, loss of system function, or extended recovery periods following a 
hazard event. Mitigation of all deficiencies could be a daunting task. The community and system owner 
need to identify a time frame for achieving community resilience. In the case of the Oregon Resilience 
Plan [OSSPAC 2013], a 50-year time frame was proposed.  
There are a number of approaches to assist in system mitigation. However, a starting point could be to 
establish an overall strategy, such as: 
x Retrofit sole treatment plants to achieve the desired performance 
x Replace the most vulnerable or least reliable pipe over time 
x Achieve full supply and treatment redundancy by building additional treatment plants 
x Improve transmission system resilience by retrofit of existing infrastructure and adding 
redundancy 
System component mitigation projects can be integrated into the capital improvement plan (CIP). The 
CIP is typically made up of projects required to address aging facilities and facilities required to meet 
increased system demands. In general, facilities such as treatment plants and tanks are built with a 50-year 
design life, equipment in those facilities with a 20-year design life, and buried pipe with a 100-year 
design life. Of course there are exceptions to these design life numbers, but the point is that over a 50-
year time frame, many of the system facilities will be replaced as they reach their design life. When that 
happens, they should be replaced with facilities and infrastructure that meet the desired performance 
criteria. The need for resilient facilities may only be one of the drivers pushing for replacement of a 
facility, with others being increased demand, high maintenance, and low reliability. 
Many communities are growing. New facilities will be required to meet those demands. Those new 
facilities can be designed to meet the desired performance criteria. In some cases, the new facilities may 
supplement existing facilities. Both the existing and new facilities may be required to meet peak day 
demands, but the community could recover following a catastrophic hazard event with the reduced 
service based on the new facility.  
Some critical facilities might be vulnerable to the hazards being evaluated. They may be essential to 
continued operation, but they may be expensive or time consuming to repair. In these cases, the 
community may consider redirecting some of their capital budget to focus on these critical facilities.  
In some cases, there may be solutions that allow quick repair of critical facilities that cost much less than 
full replacement or upgrade. Installing a new transmission pipeline to cross an earthquake fault could be 
very expensive. A community may instead decide to acquire large diameter hose to bridge the earthquake 
fault if it ruptures. 
The water distribution systems or wastewater collection system is a valuable asset for most water utilities. 
While the value of any single pipe run is less than a treatment plant or storage tank, the total length of the 
pipeline system has a high value. Unfortunately, in many communities, much of the pipe is at or beyond 
its design life and is expensive to replace. Pipelines of cast iron pipe, in particular, are vulnerable to 
earthquakes.  
224 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
There are some reasonable approaches for communities to pursue. Communities can initially focus on 
pipelines serving critical functions. Having a functional backbone system can provide benefits 
immediately after a hazard event. The backbone system consists of the transmission system and key 
distribution lines serving critical facilities such as hospitals. Once the backbone system is selected, the 
most vulnerable segments along that backbone system can be identified based on, for example, the pipe 
material, condition, and soil environment in which it is located. For earthquakes, pipelines in liquefiable 
soils are particularly vulnerable. The utility can step through this process and prioritize the pipelines that 
are at pose the highest risk and are critical to providing essential services.  
Utilities with an asset management program can lay out a pipeline replacement program that is 
coordinated with the desired time horizon for community resilience. The utility can plan emergency 
response and recovery procedures to speed recovery. Installation of isolation valves in key locations can 
allow isolation of heavily damaged portions of a system. Maintaining a significant inventory of repair 
parts can enhance the restoration process. Having mutual aid agreements in place, such as the 
Water/Wastewater Agency Network or WARN program [AWWA 2015], can also enhance the utilitys 
ability to quickly make system repairs. 
Resilience enhancements may be coupled with other infrastructure system improvements to maximize the 
benefit of limited financial resources. For instance, it can be difficult to justify replacing hundreds of 
miles of water pipelines based on earthquake resilience considerations alone, but coupled with 
replacement of aging and failing pipelines, the incremental cost of using more earthquake-resistant pipe 
materials and joints is relatively minor. Significant improvements over a shorter timeline may require a 
more extensive campaign of public outreach and education. 
16.6.2.2. Solutions for New Construction 
Water and wastewater providers should consider desired performance goals in all new construction 
projects. Projects can be designed to satisfy or exceed code requirements, where code minimum standards 
are not anticipated to meet the community resilience goals. If no codes exist for a particular category of 
structure or facility, the designer may consider available guidelines and best practices (see Table 10-3). 
The incremental cost of designing and constructing for resilience may be a relatively small percentage of 
total project costs.  
16.6.2.3. Solutions for Existing Construction 
Water and wastewater providers can integrate resilience improvements to existing infrastructure as part of 
the capital improvement planning process. The process of conducting system resilience assessments may 
identify pipelines and facilities that are critical to the overall resilience of the system and its function.  
Critical components need to be evaluated and a number of potential solutions considered, including 
retrofit or replacement of existing components or building redundant components. Retrofit of existing 
infrastructure or new redundant components can improve the anticipated system performance. In some 
cases, redundant systems can be justified based on increasing demand requirements. A new redundant 
system could provide an adequate supply to meet basic demands until the damaged system was repaired. 
Whatever is done needs to be a part of the day-to-day functions of the utility. Special features that are 
added to increase resilience, but are never used until a hazard occurs, may not be functional when they are 
needed. 
225 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
16.7. References 
Allouche, E.N.; R. Sterline; E. Chisolm; D. Hill; and D. Hall (2006) Assessment of Damage to Urban 
Buried Infrastructure in the Aftermath of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, Pipelines 2006, American Society 
of Civil Engineers (ASCE), pp. 1-8. 
American Concrete Institute (ACI 2006) ACI 350-06: Code Requirements for Environmental Engineering 
Concrete Structures, American Concrete Institute (ACI), Farmington Hills, MI.  
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2010) ASCE 7-10: Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
and Other Structures, Second Edition, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural 
Engineering Institute (SEI), Reston, VA. 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE 2013) ASCE 41-13: Seismic Evaluation and Retrofit of 
Existing Buildings, American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Structural Engineering Institute (SEI), 
Reston, VA. 
American Water Works Association (AWWA 2001) M19 Emergency Planning for Water Utilities, Fourth 
Edition, American Water Works Association (AWWA) , Denver, CO. 
American Water Works Association (AWWA 2006) AWWA D115-06 Tendon-Prestressed Concrete 
Water Tanks, American Water Works Association (AWWA), Denver, CO. 
American Water Works Association (AWWA 2010) AWWA J100-10 Risk and Resilience Management of 
Water and Wastewater Systems, American Water Works Association (AWWA), Denver, CO. 
American Water Works Association (AWWA 2011) ANSI/AWWA D100-11 Welded Carbon Steel Tanks 
for Water Storage, American Water Works Association (AWWA), Denver, CO. 
American Water Works Association (AWWA 2013) ANSI/AWWA D110-13 Wire- and Strand-Wound, 
Circular, Prestressed Concrete Water Tanks, American Water Works Association (AWWA), Denver, 
CO. 
American Water Works Association (AWWA 2014) ANSI/AWWA G430-14 Security Practices for 
Operation and Management, American Water Works Association (AWWA), Denver, CO. 
American Water Works Association (AWWA 2015) Water/Wastewater Agency Response Network 
(WARN), American Water Works Association (AWWA), Denver, CO, http://www.awwa.org/resources-
tools/water-knowledge/emergency-preparedness/water-wastewater-agency-response-network.aspx. 
Viewed April 18, 2015. 
Aubuchon, C.P. and K.M. Morley (2013) The Economic Value of Water: Providing Confidence and 
Context to FEMAs Methodology, Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, April, 
10(1), 245-265. 
Ballantyne, D.B. (1994) Minimizing Earthquake Damage, A Guide for Water Utilities, American Water 
Works Association (AWWA), Denver, CO. 
Ballantyne, D.B. and C.B. Crouse. (1997) Reliability and Restoration of Water Supply Systems for Fire 
Suppression and Drinking Following Earthquakes, NIST GCR 97-730, National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST) Building and Fire Research Laboratory, Gaithersburg, MD. 
Binning, D. (2014) J100 and the Safety Act - What's in It for Me? Journal - American Water Works 
Association, 106(12): 22-24, http://dx.doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2014.106.0167.  
Black & Veatch Corporation (2006) Report on Operations for 2005: Sewage & Water Board of New 
Orleans, Louisiana. Sewage & Water Board of New Orleans, Overland Park, KS. 
226 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and American Water Works Association (CDC/AWWA 
2012) Emergency water supply planning guide for hospitals and health care facilities,  
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Atlanta, GA, 
http://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/pdf/emergency/emergency-water-supply-planning-guide.pdf. 
Chisolm, E.I. and J.C. Matthews (2012) Impact of Hurricanes and Flooding on Buried Infrastructure, 
Leadership and Management in Engineering, July, Vol. 12, Issue 3, 151-156.  
Davis, Craig A. (2014) Water System Service Categories, Post-Earthquake Interaction, and Restoration 
Strategies, Earthquake Spectra, November, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 1487-1509. 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS 2003) Homeland Security Presidential Directive-5: 
Management of Domestic Incidents, DHS, Washington, DC 
http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Homeland%20Security%20Presidential%20Directive
%205.pdf. Viewed April 19, 2015. 
Eidinger, J. (2012) Performance of Water Systems during the Maule Mw 8.8 Earthquake 27 February 
2010, Earthquake Spectra, Vol 28, No. S1, S605-S620. 
Eidinger, J.M. and A.K. Tang (2012) Christchurch, New Zealand Earthquake Sequence of Mw 7.1 
September 04, 2010 Mw 6.3 February 22, 2011 Mw 6.0 June 13, 2011: Lifeline Performance, American 
Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), Reston, VA, 
http://static1.squarespace.com/static/5006875e24ac21f35d8de8d2/t/51734da0e4b08db71071600f/136651
1008778/Lifelines_Compendium.pdf. 
Eidinger, John and Craig A. Davis (2012) Recent Earthquakes Implications for US Water Utilities, Web 
Report #4408, G&E Engineering Systems Inc. for Water Research Foundation, Denver, CO, 
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5006875e24ac21f35d8de8d2/t/51622bd9e4b0b72aa94f503b/136538
8249527/4408+WRF+Recent+Eqs+Aug+29+2012.pdf. 
Elliott, T. and A.K. Tang (2009) Pacific Northwest Storms of December 1-4, 2007 Lifeline Performance, 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), Reston, VA. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA 2010) VSAT  Risk Assessment Tool for Water Sector Utilities, 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Washington, D.C. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA 2011) Planning for an Emergency Drinking Water Supply, EPA 
600/R-11/054, Prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection Agencys National Homeland Security 
Research Center by the American Water Works Association (AWWA) and CDM, Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA), Washington, D.C, June. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA 2014) Water Health and Economic Analysis Tool, Version 3.0, 
Consequence Analysis Tool for Water Utilities, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Washington, 
D.C. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2012) Hazus-MH 2.1 User Manual, Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2013) Mitigation Assessment Team Report Hurricane 
Sandy in New Jersey and New York Building Performance Observations, Recommendations, and 
Technical Guidance, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington, DC. 
Hoover, J.E. (1941) Water supply facilities and national defense, Journal - American Water Works 
Association, 33(11), 1861-1865. 
McMullen, L.D. (1994) Surviving the Flood: Teamwork Pays Off in Des Moines, Journal - American 
Water Works Association, 86(1): 68-72. 
227 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
Morley, K.M. (2012) A lesson in resilience from derecho, Journal - American Water Works 
Association, 104(9), 20, 22-23. http://www.awwa.org/publications/journal-
awwa/abstract/articleid/33135246.aspx.  
Murphy, M. (1994) Weathering the Storm: Water Systems Versus Hurricanes, Journal - American 
Water Works Association, 86(1): 74-83. 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST 1996) The January 17, 1995 Hyogoken-Nanbu 
(Kobe) Earthquake: Performance of Structures, Lifelines, and Fire Protection Systems, Gaithersburg, 
MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
New York City Department of Environmental Protection (NYCDEP 2013) New York City Wastewater 
Resiliency Plan: Climate Risk Assessment and Adaptation Study, New York City Department of 
Environmental Protection, October, 
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/html/about_dep/wastewater_resiliency_plan.shtml. 
Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission (OSSPAC 2013) The Oregon Resilience Plan, 
Reducing Risk and Improving Recovery for the Next Cascadia Earthquake and Tsunami, Salem, OR: 
Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission. 
PPD-21 (2013) Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-21, The White House, February 12, 2013, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/02/12/presidential-policy-directive-critical-
infrastructure-security-and-resil. 
PPD-8 (2011) Presidential Policy Directive, PPD-8  National Preparedness, The White House, March 
30, 2011, http://www.dhs.gov/presidential-policy-directive-8-national-preparedness. 
Preparedness, Emergency Response, and Recovery CIPAC Workgroup (2009) All-Hazard Consequence 
Management Planning for the Water Sector, November. 
Randon, C. (2006) Employees fight to keep infants safe, PR Tactics, September, www.prsa.org.  
Rhoades, C.C.; D. Entwistle,; and D. Butler (2011) The Influence of Wildfire Extent and Severity on 
Streamwater Chemistry, Sediment and Temperature Following the Hayman Fire, Colorado, 
International Journal of Wildland Fire, 20:3:430. http://dx.doi.org/10.1071/WF09086.  
Rosen, J.S.; A.J. Whelton; M.J. McGuire; J.L. Clancy; T. Bartrand; A. Eaton; J. Patterson; M. Dourson; 
P. Nance; C. Adams (2014) The crude MCHM chemical spill in Charleston, W.Va., Journal - American 
Water Works Association, 106 (9): 65-74. http://dx.doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2014.106.0134.  
Sanders, D.A. (1997) Damage to Wastewater Treatment Facilities from Great Flood of 1993, Journal of 
Environmental Engineering, January, Vol. 123, Issue 1. 
SFPUC (2006) General Seismic Requirements for Design of New Facilities and Upgrade of Existing 
Facilities, San Francisco Public Utilities Commission, San Francisco, CA. 
Stevens, D.R. and L.D. Pittman (2004) Emergency Power Source Planning for Water and Wastewater, 
American Water Works Association (AWWA), Denver, CO. 
Tanaka, S.S. (1995) Shaken into action, Journal - American Water Works Association, 87(5): 71-75. 
The White House (2013b) Executive Order 13636  Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, the 
White House, Washington, DC, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-02-19/pdf/2013-03915.pdf. 
Viewed April 19, 2015.  
Thompson, Phil (2012) Standby Power Generation: A Key Part of an Emergency Plan, Journal - 
American Water Works Association, 104(1): 34-36, http://dx.doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2012.104.0019. 
228 
I  
Water and Wastewater Systems  
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,  Environmental Protection 
Agency, and American Water Works Association (CDC/EPA/AWWA 2013) Drinking Water Advisory 
Communication Toolbox,  Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Atlanta, 
GA, http://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/emergency/dwa-comm-toolbox/index.html?s_cid=cs_001, 
http://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/pdf/emergency/drinking-water-advisory-communication-toolbox.pdf. 
Writer, J.H.; A. Hohner; J. Oropeza; A. Schmidt; K.M. Cawley; F.L. and Rosario-Ortiz (2014) Water 
treatment implications after the High Park Wildfire, Colorado, Journal - American Water Works 
Association, 106:4, E189-E199, http://dx.doi.org/10.5942/jawwa.2014.106.0055. 
229 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
17. Community Resilience Metrics 
Community Resilience Metrics Executive Summary 
Metrics help communities assess their current level of resilience and the potential benefits of actions to 
improve its resilience. To be of value, metrics selected by the planning team should be indicators of the 
communitys capacity to respond to and recover from hazard events. The primary metrics used 
throughout this Guide are times for recovery of function (recovery times) for building clusters and 
supporting infrastructure systems identified as being critical to the economic vitality and social well-being 
of the community.  
Recovery times are estimated for the prevailing hazards that are expected to impact the community. Given 
a set of physical impacts to the built environment and recovery times, it then becomes possible to estimate 
the associated economic, social, and environmental impacts. Selecting metrics to measure community-
level economic, social, and environmental impacts and predicting how they will be affected by specific 
community planning and implementation decisions is a challenging and ongoing area of research.  
The sections below review examples of economic, social and environmental metrics suggested in the 
research literature and summarize several representative resilience assessment methodologies. While the 
economic dimension is just one of three main community-level dimensions to be assessed along with the 
social and environmental dimensions, it is perhaps the most tractable and well-developed of the three.  
17.1. Background 
Community resilience metrics come in a wide variety of types. They can be descriptive or quantitative; 
they can be based on interviews, expert opinion, engineering analysis, or pre-existing datasets. They can 
also be presented as an overall score or as a set of separately reported scores across physical, economic, 
social, and environmental dimensions. Regardless of the methodologies used to develop and summarize 
the results, effective community resilience metrics must address two questions [National Academies 
2012a]: 
x How can community leaders know how resilient their community is? 
x And how can they know if their decisions and investments to improve resilience are making a 
significant difference?3 
In 2012, the National Academies Committee on Increasing National Resilience to Hazards and Disasters 
and the Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy evaluated seventeen approaches to 
measuring various aspects of resilience. The authors concluded that none of the seventeen existing 
methodologies satisfactorily addressed both of the two basic questions posed above. As a result, one of 
the six main recommendations from the report was development of a national resilience scorecard, from 
which communities can then develop their own, tailored scorecards [National Academies 2012b]. 
Similar recommendations are in other recent reviews of hazard risk reduction and resilience [U.K. 
Government Office for Science 2012; UNISDR 2012]. A tailorable or locally relevant scorecard indicates 
that a single prescriptive scorecard may not be appropriate for a wide range of communities (e.g., from 
small agriculture communities to large industrial cities).  
                                                      
3As stated in (National Academies 2012b), measuring resilience is challenging but essential if communities want to track their 
progress toward resilience and prioritize their actions accordingly. 
230 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
17.2. Desirable Characteristics for Community Resilience Metrics 
From the community perspective, effective community resilience metrics should be accurate, reliable, 
comprehensive, scalable, affordable, and actionable metrics of the communitys capacity to respond to 
and recover from hazard events. Cutter [2014] suggests that communities seek resilience metrics that are 
open and transparent and align with the communitys goals and vision. Further, community resilience 
metrics need to be simple and well-documented, address multiple hazards, be replicated by others, 
characterize geographic extent, physical dimensions, and community members, and be adaptable and 
scalable to different communities and changing circumstances. 
This chapter focuses on community resilience metrics and methodologies that can reliably predict the 
physical, economic, social, and environmental implications (positive or negative) of community decisions 
(active or passive) made with respect to planning, siting, design, construction, operation, protection, 
maintenance, repair, and restoration of the built environment. 
17.3. Types of Metrics 
As defined in PPD-21 [2013] and emphasized throughout this Guide, the concept of resilience extends 
beyond the magnitude of direct physical damage sustained by the various components of the built 
environment for a hazard event. The concept of community resilience requires metrics that can evaluated 
and measure performance at a community scale, rather than, for example, that of a single building, 
infrastructure system, or social dimension. 
Looking beyond direct physical damage and repair costs for the built environment, at least four broad 
categories of metrics might be considered by communities: (1) recovery of community function metrics 
(recovery time), (2) economic vitality metrics, (3) social well-being metrics, and (4) environmental 
resilience metrics. A community can use metrics to measure improvements over time, or predict the 
effectiveness of proposed solutions. However, predicting how these metrics will be impacted by specific 
community planning and implementation decisions is a challenging and ongoing area of research.  
Community resilience metrics may have a direct and quantifiable cause-and-effect influence on resilience; 
whereas others may either have some postulated influence on resilience or simply be correlated with 
resilience. Examples of metrics that may influence or correlate with recovery times, economic vitality, 
social well-being, and environmental resilience appear below.  
17.3.1. Time to Recovery of Function 
A metric based on time to recovery of function for the built environment is easy to grasp, but difficult to 
predict with precision or confidence. Estimates of recovery times might be affected by: 
x Design criteria used for components of the built environment and their condition immediately 
prior to the hazard event 
x Hazard loads and effects applied to the built environment during and after the event 
x Spatial distribution and extent of physical damage to the built environment 
x Availability of resources and leadership to improve or repair the built environment 
x Critical dependencies among the built environment and social structures within a community  
Recovery times directly impact economic, social and environmental processes in a community. As such, 
estimates of system recovery times become a prerequisite for most, if not all, other measures of 
community resilience. Due to the large volume of data required and the complexity of modeling the built 
231 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
environment at a community scale, recovery times are likely to be estimates based on some combination 
of simplified modeling, past experience, and expert judgment. 
An example of recovery times for building cluster and infrastructure systems of a hypothetical community 
appears in Chapter 9 in Volume I. The recovery times are based on the buildings and infrastructure 
system examples discussed in Chapters 12 through 16. Each community will have its own set of building 
clusters, infrastructure systems, and desired performance levels that reflect its goals and priorities. 
17.3.2. Economic Vitality 
Economic health and development are major concerns for communities. Economic development concerns 
include attracting and retaining businesses and jobs, building the tax base, addressing poverty and 
inequality, enhancing local amenities, and economic sustainability. These factors are discussed below. 
Further background on economic modeling approaches and issues is given in Section 17.5. 
17.3.2.1. Attracting and Retaining Businesses and Jobs 
Generally, a community that cannot attract and retain businesses and jobs is in decline. Therefore, 
attracting and retaining businesses and jobs is a major concern of most communities; in particular 
communities prefer businesses that produce high-paying jobs. Metrics for economic vitality might include 
the employment rate, per capita income, per capital gross domestic or regional product, and education 
attainment rate.  
Metrics indicative of a communitys ability to continue attracting and retaining businesses and jobs 
depend on the resilience of building clusters and infrastructure systems. For example, the availability of 
safe and affordable housing after a hazard event, along with supporting infrastructure services, are key 
requirements for employees and the economic health of the community. 
17.3.2.2. Tax Base 
For most cities, local revenue sources consist of some combination of property and sales tax. A sales tax 
revenue base is maintained by attracting commercial businesses and jobs. The property tax revenue base 
depends on property values. 
Tax base metrics include real-estate prices, rents, and tourism revenue (e.g., hotel tax). Metrics indicative 
of how a communitys tax base would be affected by a hazard event might include the extent of property 
insurance coverage across the community, the percent of property in areas susceptible to hazards (like 
flood plains), and the number of building permits issued. 
17.3.2.3. Poverty and Income Distribution  
Poverty and income distribution are a major concern of local communities. Many communities have 
programs to decrease poverty in their neighborhoods, and a significant amount of external funding is 
available to alleviate poverty in communities. This concern intersects with community resilience because 
the disadvantaged are often the most vulnerable after hazard events. Metrics of poverty and income 
distribution include the poverty rate and the Gini coefficient, a measure of income dispersion [The World 
Bank 2015]. 
232 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
17.3.2.4. Local Services and Amenities 
Local services and amenities include a variety of other services, such as public transportation, parks, 
museums, restaurants, and theaters. Local services and amenities improve the quality of life for local 
residents. In addition, improving local amenities may indirectly help attract and retain businesses and 
jobs. Amenities are provided by multiple sources. Some are provided by local governments, some are 
privately provided, and some are based on the natural environment. Metrics for amenities will depend on 
the community, and may be indirectly measured through economic vitality, social well-being, or 
environmental metrics. 
17.3.2.5. Economic Sustainability 
Local communities are interested in ensuring they develop and maintain a vibrant and thriving economy, 
even amid hazard events. Metrics of economic sustainability include growth rates of gross domestic or 
regional product. 
Factors that might affect a communitys economic sustainability after hazard events include the degree to 
which the local economy depends on a single industry. Metrics could include percent of jobs in each 
service industry, such as agriculture or mining. 
17.3.2.6. Other Economic Metrics 
A number of economic metrics are associated with or affect non-economic aspects of community 
resilience. For example, debt ratios are a measure of a communitys ability to deal with hazard events. 
Poverty levels may impact the ability of people to rebound from a hazard event, as well as car and phone 
ownership. Similarly, economic sustainability will strongly influence social capital. 
17.3.3. Social Well-Being 
Based on the hierarchy of human needs presented in Section 10.3, social metrics should address:  
x Survival  preservation of life and availability of water, food, clothing and shelter  
x Safety and security  personal safety, financial security, health and well-being  
x Sense of belonging  belonging and acceptance among family, friends, neighborhoods, and 
organizations 
x Growth and achievement  opportunities for recognition and fulfillment 
The resilience of a community following a hazard event depends on how well these needs are met. 
Examples of metrics for each of the human needs are provided below. The Canterbury Wellbeing Index 
[CERA 2014] is an example of a resilience plan that includes several of these metrics. 
17.3.3.1. Survival 
Survival depends on the ability of residents, employees and visitors in a community to meet basic 
physical requirements, including water, food, shelter, and clothing. Renters may be more vulnerable in 
event recovery since they may lack access to financial aid information or sufficient options for shelter in 
extreme cases [Cutter et al. 2003]. 
The ability to meet these requirements depends on the functionality of buildings and infrastructure 
systems, supply systems, and system personnel. These needs may be supplied by governmental 
organizations, non-governmental aid organizations, or the private sector.  
233 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
Metrics for survival during or after a hazard event may include:  
x Housing availability and affordability 
x Poverty rates 
x Homeless rates  
x Building code adoption and enforcement history 
x Effectiveness of warning systems 
x Comprehensive emergency operations plans (mutual aid agreements, emergency response resources, 
urban search and rescue teams, public shelters) 
x Capacity of community service organizations that assist in distributing water, food, or clothing or 
providing shelter after a hazard event 
x Level of household hazard preparation 
x Percentage of homes that are owner occupied or rentals 
x Percentage of insured homes and businesses 
x Availability of short- and medium-term accommodation 
x Distance to family and friends unaffected by the hazard event 
17.3.3.2. Safety and Security 
Safety and security includes all aspects of personal and financial security, and health and well-being. 
People require safety and security in their personal lives from situations of violence, physical or verbal 
abuse, etc., as well as knowing that their family and friends are safe. Individuals also require financial 
security, which can include job security, a consistent income, savings accounts, insurance policies, and 
other safety nets. Finally, people require safety from poor health conditions, so that they can enjoy life 
and consistent well-being. 
Examples of metrics for personal safety evaluated before and after a hazard event could include 
community statistics on assaults, property offenses, re-offending rates, and reports on child abuse or 
neglect.  
Examples of metrics for financial security include employment rates (also under economic metrics in 
Section 17.3.2.1). Additionally, metrics on how employment may be affected by a hazard event may 
include occupation type, education levels, percentage of residents that commute outside the communities 
for work, and gender. For instance, women may have a more difficult time than men retaining 
employment due to employment type, lower wages, or family care responsibilities. Some occupations, 
such as those based on tourism, may be more severely affected by a hazard event [Cutter et al., 2003].  
Examples of metrics for health and well-being could include acute medical admissions, immunization 
rates, cancer admissions, substance abuse rates, and blood donor rates. Additionally, metrics for 
community health and well-being may include the percentage of the population with health insurance, 
access to health services, and community demographics. Health service metrics include health system 
demand and capacity for emergency rooms, in-patient beds, out-patient clinics, community health centers, 
and mental health services. Community demographics include age distribution, number of individuals 
with disabilities, or those with access and functional needs. 
17.3.3.3. Sense of Belonging 
Social metrics can also address belonging and acceptance among various groups of people (e.g., family, 
friends, school groups, sports teams, work colleagues, religious congregation) or belonging to a place or 
location. Examples of metrics related to sense of belonging include [Foxton and Jones, 2011]:  
234 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
Civic participation: 
x Voter registration or voter participation rates 
x Involvement in local action groups 
x Perception of being well-informed of local affairs 
Social networks: 
x Frequency of contact with friends, family, neighbors, etc. 
x Number of geographically close friends and family 
Social participation: 
x Membership and involvement in community social, cultural, and leisure groups, including sports 
clubs  
x Membership and involvement in religious organizations and other belief systems 
x Volunteers in social organizations 
Trust 
x Confidence in leadership, such as government, businesses, and social organizations at various 
levels 
x Trust in community members  
17.3.3.4. Growth and Achievement 
Humans need to feel a sense of achievement and respect in society, accompanied by the need for 
continual growth and exploration. Activities related to growth and achievement include education and 
participation in arts and recreation. Examples of metrics related to educational growth and achievement 
include: educational system capacity and demand for teachers, classrooms, books, graduation rates, 
memberships in public libraries, and education levels. 
17.3.4. Environmental Resilience 
In addition to promoting economic vitality and social well-being, there is a growing interest in protecting 
and improving natural environments (e.g., being green and maintaining a small ecological footprint). The 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [EPA 2014] defines environmental community resilience as 
minimizing environmental risks associated with hazards, quickly returning critical environmental and 
ecological services to functionality after a hazard, and applying this learning process to reduce 
vulnerabilities and risks to future incidents.  
Environmental resilience metrics include air, water and soil quality; degree of development within 
floodplains or other environmentally sensitive areas; waste treatment level and disposal capacities; 
average daily water usage; percent impervious surfaces; erosion rates; wetlands loss; and many others 
[e.g., EPA 2014; Cutter et al. 2014; UNISDR 2014]. 
235 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
17.3.5. Hybrid Metrics 
Some metrics combine other metrics into an overall score. Additional types of metrics, beyond the four 
broad categories discussed above, may be included. Metrics for buildings or infrastructure systems are 
discussed in Section 17.3.6. 
Due to the sparsity of data, the unique aspects of how each hazard event affects a community, and the 
lack of generally applicable community resilience models, the scaling and weighting schemes used to 
aggregate disparate metrics into an overall score are largely based on the reasoning and judgment of those 
developing the overall metric. Scaling and weighting schemes need to avoid the use of overlapping or 
closely correlated metrics, as they can bias resilience plans with an over-weighted metrics or by double 
counting benefits. One widely used technique is to monetize all of the metrics, such as the statistical value 
of lost lives, lost jobs, lost business revenue, and increased health care costs. However, this approach 
cannot adequately address all of the social or environmental dimensions of community resilience. 
17.3.6. Other Metrics 
Examples of building or infrastructure system metrics include: 
x Housing occupancy, business property occupancy, temporary shelter demand  
x Water system pressure level, water quality, or average daily demand  
x Transportation system demand and capacity, such as vehicles per hour or shipping tonnage 
capacities 
x Communications systems availability and reliability for phone, internet, etc. 
x Energy systems availability and reliability for electric power, natural gas, liquid fuels  
17.4. Examples of Existing Community Resilience Assessment Methodologies 
Many community-wide resilience assessment methodologies have been proposed in the research 
literature, as discussed in Section 17.1. This section presents a brief overview of nine methodologies and 
their applicability as tools for assessing community resilience. The nine methodologies represent a cross-
section of community assessment sources and techniques. Not all of the nine methodologies were 
developed specifically for assessing community resilience, but they are considered as relevant and 
potentially applicable in whole or part.  
There are a number of other resilience assessment tools that are not addressed here. The methodology 
review is intended to help communities consider the variety of tools available for obtaining the 
information and community involvement needed to develop a community resilience plan. 
17.4.1. SPUR Methodology 
SPUR is a member-supported nonprofit organization that brings various stakeholders together to develop 
solutions to problems faced by cities in the San Francisco Bay Area. As a part of its work, SPUR 
developed a methodology that provides a framework for improving San Franciscos resilience through 
seismic mitigation policies. The stated goals of the SPUR report [2009] are: 
1. Define the concept of resilience in the context of disaster planning, 
2. Establish performance goals for the expected earthquake that supports our definition 
of resilience, 
236 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
3. Define transparent performance measures that help us reach our performance goals; 
and 
4. Suggest next steps for San Franciscos new buildings, existing buildings and lifelines. 
The SPUR methodology focuses on establishing performance goals for several building clusters (i.e., 
groups of buildings that provide a community service, such as critical response facilities, emergency 
housing, or neighborhood services) and establishing target recovery times for a specified earthquake event 
in the San Francisco area. While economic and social metrics are not direct outputs of the SPUR 
methodology, the building clusters selected and recovery time goals provided are clearly intended to 
improve both the economic and social resilience of San Francisco. Similarly, although SPUR focuses on 
earthquakes as the primary hazard, the underlying methodology is applicable to other communities and 
hazards. 
17.4.2. Oregon Resilience Plan 
In 2011, the Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission (OSSPAC) was directed by Oregon 
House Resolution 3 to lead and coordinate preparation of an Oregon Resilience Plan that reviews policy 
options, summarizes relevant reports and studies by state agencies, and makes recommendations on 
policy direction to protect lives and keep commerce flowing during and after a Cascadia earthquake and 
tsunami. The OSSPAC assembled eight task groups (earthquake and tsunami, business and work force 
continuity, coastal communities, critical buildings, transportation, energy, information and 
communications, water and wastewater) and assigned tasks to each group: 
1. Determine the likely impacts of a magnitude 9.0 Cascadia earthquake and tsunami 
on its assigned social and physical systems, and estimate the time required to restore 
functions if the earthquake were to strike under present conditions; 
2. Define acceptable timeframes to restore functions after a future Cascadia 
earthquake to fulfill expected resilient performance; and  
3. Recommend changes in practice and policies that, if implemented during the next 50 
years, will allow Oregon to reach the desired resilience targets. 
The Oregon Resilience Plan [OSSPAC 2013] built on the SPUR methodology and the Resilient 
Washington State initiative [Washington State Seismic Safety Committee Emergency Management 
Council 2012] to produce a statewide projection of the impacts of a single earthquake and tsunami event. 
The Resilient Washington State initiative is a framework developed based on the methodology developed 
by SPUR, similar to the Oregon Resilience Plan. The Resilient Washington State framework uses 
performance goals table and criteria similar to that in the Oregon Resilience Plan. Predicted impacts 
include lives lost, buildings destroyed or damaged, and households displaced. A particular statewide 
vulnerability identified in the study is Oregons liquid fuel supply and the cascade of impacts induced by 
a long-term disruption of the liquid fuel supply. The study includes recommended actions to improve 
resilience for the selected hazard event and shorten the states recovery time. 
17.4.3. UNISDR Disaster Resilience Scorecard for Cities 
The United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) Disaster Resilience 
Scorecard for Cities provides a set of assessments that will allow cities to understand how resilient they 
are to natural disasters [UNISDR 2014]. The Scorecard is intended to enable cities to establish a 
baseline measurement of their current level of disaster resilience, to identify priorities for investment and 
action, and to track their progress in improving their disaster resilience over time. There are 85 disaster 
resilience evaluation criteria grouped into the following areas: 
237 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
x Research including evidence-based compilation and communication of threats and needed 
responses 
x Organization including policy, planning, coordination and financing 
x Infrastructure including critical and social infrastructure and systems and appropriate 
development 
x Response capability including information provision and enhancing capacity 
x Environment including maintaining and enhancing ecosystem services 
x Recovery including triage, support services and event planning 
Each evaluation criterion addresses an aspect of disaster resilience and has a qualitative measurement 
(from 0 to 5, where 5 is best practice). 
The formal checklist is organized around 10 Essentials for Making Cities Resilient, which were 
developed to align with the five priorities of the Hyogo Framework [UNISDR 2005]. The overall score is 
the percentage of possible points from each of the 85 measures. UNISDR suggests that cities plan on 2 to 
3 people working for a minimum of 1 week to complete an assessment, ranging up to 2 months for a more 
detailed and comprehensive assessment. 
17.4.4. CARRI Community Resilience System 
The Community and Regional Resilience Institute (CARRI) developed the Community Resilience System 
(CRS) [CARRI 2013] to be an action-oriented, web-enabled process that helps communities to assess, 
measure, and improve their resilience to  threats and disruptions of all kinds, and ultimately be 
rewarded for their efforts. The Community Resilience System (CRS) brings together people, process and 
technology to improve resilience in individual communities. The system includes not only a knowledge 
base to help inform communities on their resilience path but also a process guide that provides a 
systematic approach to moving from interest and analysis to visioning and action planning. It also 
provides a collaborative mechanism for other interested stakeholders to support community efforts. 
The CRS is a DHS/FEMA funded initiative. It began in 2010, convening three working groups: 
researchers (Subject Matter Group), community leaders (Community Leaders Group), and government 
and private sector representatives (Resilience Benefits Group). The findings of these working groups 
culminated in the development of the CRS web-based tool along with pilot implementations in eight 
communities commencing in the summer of 2011.  
The CRS addresses 18 distinct Community Service Areas (CSAs) and is designed specifically for use by 
community leaders. The web process is a checklist driven approach, with questions tailored for each of 
the CSAs. The answer to a question may trigger additional questions. For many of the questions, 
comment fields are provided so that communities may answer the questions as specifically as possible. 
The CARRI team notes that a facilitated approach (i.e., an outside group working with the community, 
such as CARRI), is most effective. The CRS process works more productively as a partially facilitated 
model where some supportive expertise assists communities in applying aspects of resilience to and 
embedding them within their community circumstances and processes. 
17.4.5. Communities Advancing Resilience Toolkit (CART) 
The Communities Advancing Resilience Toolkit or CART [TDC 2012] was developed by the Terrorism 
and Disaster Center at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center. It was funded by the 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, U.S. Department of Health and Human 
238 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
Services, and the National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism, U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security, and by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
CART is designed to enhance community resilience through planning and action. It engages community 
organizations in collecting and using assessment data to develop and implement solutions for building 
community resilience for hazard prevention, preparedness, response, and recovery. The CART process 
uses a combination of qualitative and quantitative approaches, and it involves these steps: 
1. Generating a community profile (CART Team and Partners) 
2. Refine the community profile (Community Work Groups) 
3. Develop a strategic plan (Community Planning Groups) 
4. Implement the plan (Community Leaders and Groups) 
The CART approach is not hazard specific, and is applicable across communities of varying size and 
type. It is innovative, providing a complete set of tools and guidelines for communities to assess their 
resilience across a number of domains. The toolkit includes the CART assessment survey, key informant 
interviews, data collection framework, community conversations, neighborhood infrastructure maps, 
community ecological maps, stakeholder analysis, SWOT analysis, and capacity and vulnerability 
assessment. The focus of the approach is to provide a process that engages communities in thinking about 
resilience and to provide a foundation for more advanced resilience activities. 
17.4.6. Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities (BRIC) 
The Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities (BRIC [Cutter et al. 2014]) process builds on prior 
work by Cutter et al. [2010], and is based on empirical research with a conceptual and theoretical 
framework. BRIC measures overall community resilience. The approach provides a resilience metric for 
use in a policy decisions. Using data from 30 public and freely available sources, BRIC comprises 49 
indicators (metrics) associated with six domains:  
x Social (10 indicators) 
x Economic (8 indicators) 
x Housing and infrastructure (9 indicators) 
x Institutional (10 indicators) 
x Community Capital (7 indicators) 
x Environmental (5 indicators) 
BRIC is not hazard specific, and has been implemented at the county level. The 49 indicators were 
selected through conceptual, theoretical, and empirical justifications as capturing qualities associated with 
community resilience. Indicators in the six domains identify potential areas that policy makers may 
consider for investment and intervention strategies to improve resilience.  
17.4.7. Rockefeller Foundation City Resilience Framework 
The City Resilience Framework (CRF) is a framework for articulating city resilience developed by 
Arup [2014] with support from the Rockefeller Foundation 100 Resilient Cities initiative. This framework 
is based on an extensive literature review, including cities with varying characteristics and a substantial 
amount of fieldwork to collect data and develop case studies. The framework organizes 12 indicators into 
4 categories: 
239 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
x Leadership and strategy 
x Health and wellbeing 
x Infrastructure and environment 
x Economy and social 
This organization integrates social and physical aspects, and it considers human-driven processes as 
components of the community. Economic constraints are also considered in an integral way for planning 
purposes. The 12 indicators span seven qualities identified as characteristic of a resilient city: being 
reflective, resourceful, robust, inclusive, redundant, integrated, and flexible. 
The CRF serves as the basis for a City Resilience Index (CRI) being developed in 2015. The CRI will 
further refine the 4 categories and 12 indicators of the framework into 48 to 54 sub-indicators and 130 to 
150 variables or metrics.  
17.4.8. NOAA Coastal Community Resilience Index 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administrations Coastal Community Resilience Index [Sempier 
et al. 2010] was developed to provide a simple and inexpensive self-assessment tool to give community 
leaders a method of predicting whether their community will reach and maintain an acceptable level of 
functioning after a hazard event. The tool is to be completed by experienced local planners, engineers, 
floodplain managers, and administrators in less than three hours using readily available, existing sources 
of information, in a yes/no question format.  
The Coastal Community Resilience Index (CCRI) primarily addresses coastal storms, particularly 
hurricanes and storm surge or rain induced flooding events. More specifically, it focuses on immediate 
and short-term restoration of basic services and how long a community will take to recover after a hazard 
event. The eight page assessment form addresses six broad areas:  
1. Critical facilities and infrastructure 
2. Transportation issues 
3. Community plans and agreements 
4. Mitigation measures 
5. Business plans 
6. Social systems 
The resulting assessment is meant to identify vulnerabilities that should be addressed before the next 
hazard event, including areas in which a community should become more resilient and where resources 
should be allocated. It also estimates the adaptability of a community to a hazard, but is not meant to 
replace a detailed study. The authors note that The Resilience Index and methodology does not replace a 
detailed study. But, the Resilience Index resulting from this Community Self-Assessment may 
encourage your community to seek further consultation.  
The authors also state that the tool should not be used to compare one community to another. Rather, they 
recommend using it as an approach to internal evaluation to identify areas in which a given community 
might increase its resilience. As part of its development process the NOAA CRI was pilot tested in 17 
communities in five states (Alabama, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas). In addition to 
developing their community indices, these pilot tests were also used to further refine and improve the 
assessment methodology. 
240 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
17.4.9. FEMA Hazus Methodology  
The Federal Emergency Management Agencys Hazus tool [FEMA 2015] is a nationally applicable 
standardized methodology that contains models for estimating potential losses from earthquakes, floods 
and hurricanes. Hazus uses Geographic Information Systems (GIS) technology to estimate physical, 
economic and social impacts of hazards. It graphically illustrates the boundaries of high-risk locations due 
to earthquake, hurricane and floods. Users can visualize the spatial relationships between populations and 
other fixed geographic assets or resources for the specific hazard being modeled  a crucial function in 
the pre-disaster planning process. 
The Hazus methodology and associated data sets cover the entire U.S. The study region can be defined as 
any combination of U.S. Census tracts. The specific hazard models included are earthquake (including 
fire following), flood (riverine or coastal) and hurricane (wind and storm surge). The focus of the model 
is on immediate physical and economic impacts, and social impacts to a lesser degree. The model 
produces outputs on expected loss of use for buildings and infrastructure systems (earthquake and flood 
only), shelter requirements, casualties (earthquake only), building contents and inventory losses, lost 
wages and income, and indirect economic losses (earthquake and flood only). Estimated repair times are 
explicitly considered in economic loss estimates produced by the model, but the economic outputs are not 
tabulated or viewable as a function of time. While Hazus can be used to assess losses avoided through 
some mitigation measures, it does not estimate mitigation costs and, therefore, does not output estimates 
of return on investment. 
Some information required for a community-level resilience assessment is not addressed, such as system 
dependencies, social impacts, and recovery of community functions. However, the Hazus methodology 
and the types of results produced could support more comprehensive methodologies. 
17.4.10. Comparison Matrix 
Figure 17-1 provides a summary comparison of the nine example methodologies discussed in the 
preceding sections. As noted earlier, not all of these methodologies were originally developed specifically 
for the purpose of assessing community resilience, but each is thought to offer relevant and potentially 
applicable methods, metrics, or processes. 
Each methodology was assessed on three broad dimensions: (1) scope, (2) utility, and (3) impacts 
assessed. Scope includes the breath of community sizes, hazard types and intensities, recovery time scales 
(e.g., short, medium, and long-term), systems (i.e., different components of the built environment), and 
system dependencies covered by the methodology. Utility addresses the clarity and ease-of-use of the 
methodology, the extent of subject matter expert (SME) support required to implement the methodology, 
the value of the methodology outputs for planning, and how well the methodology and its outputs align 
with the definition of resilience given in PPD-21. Impacts assessed addresses the extent to which the 
methodology addresses each of the first three types of metrics discussed in this chapter (i.e., recovery 
times, economic vitality and social well-being). A fourth dimension is included in Figure 17-1 to 
summarize the data collection and analysis techniques that are either a core or optional element of the 
methodology. Assessments were made in the context of community resilience, specifically as it pertains 
to the built environment. 
241 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
 
Figure 17-1: Preliminary summary assessment of nine existing community resilience methodologies 
Consistent with the findings of previously published assessments, none of the nine methods reviewed is 
uniformly strong in each of the three dimensions. However, it may be possible to combine the best 
features of several existing and emerging methodologies to produce a new community resilience 
assessment methodology that addresses the measurement needs of a community. 
17.5. Economic Evaluation of Community Resilience Investment Portfolio  
While economic vitality is just one of the three community-level dimensions to be assessed (along with 
the social and environmental dimensions), it is perhaps the most tractable and well-developed of the three. 
This section briefly summarizes existing economic concepts related to the evaluation of investments to 
improve community resilience. The focus is on development of a portfolio of investments that maximize 
the social net benefits to the community, recognizing constraints, uncertainty, and dependencies that may 
affect the mix of investments. 
242 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
17.5.1. Portfolio Considerations 
Economic Efficiency. Economic efficiency refers to obtaining the maximum benefit from the resources 
available, or more simply, it means not wasting resources. 
Maximization of Net Benefits. Improved community resilience can increase the net benefits associated 
with a level of service. Net benefits are the increased value of the improved level of service minus the 
cost of obtaining that level of service. For instance, one of several alternatives may maximize the net 
benefits to the community. While improved levels of service are typically more costly, this type of 
analysis can help identify a level of service where the net benefits are maximized.  
Minimization of Cost and Loss. From an economic perspective, this is an equivalent formulation to 
maximizing net benefits. Since the level of service is defined in terms of minimizing costs and losses, it 
may be a more convenient format for analysis. Expressing the results of this analysis in terms of net 
benefits is straightforward. 
First-Cost vs. Life-Cycle Cost. Effort to identify alternatives that maximize net benefits depends on an 
accurate estimate of benefits and costs. When estimating the costs of attaining a desired level of service, 
all life-cycle costs need to be accounted for. It is not sufficient to include first costs or construction costs 
only. Operational costs, maintenance costs, replacement costs and end-of-life costs, among others, need to 
be included. 
Multiple Objectives. When there are several complementary and overlapping objectives, the analysis 
needs to account for the type of losses that a community wishes to avoid. In any analysis of avoided 
losses, care needs to be taken not to double-count savings. 
Minimize Economic Losses. The simplest evaluation may be that of minimizing economic losses. This 
approach examines the difference between economic gain (in terms of avoided losses) and costs of the 
desired level of service.  
Minimize Loss of Life. The objectives all relate to economic losses, but the most important consideration 
is avoiding loss of life and other casualties. If loss of life is included in the optimization, the benefits are 
measured in terms of lives saved (or deaths avoided), while the costs are typically measured in dollars by 
assigning a value to the benefits. For lives saved, the Value of a Statistical Life is a standard approach.  
However, some form of Lexicographic Preferences could be used as an alternative to directly valuing a 
statistical life or other non-economic amenities. Here each objective is strictly ranked, and then optimized 
in order. For example, an assessment could optimize for loss of life and then for economic losses. This 
ranking approach would ensure the selection of an alternative that minimizes loss of life (irrespective of 
costs). Next, the minimum cost alternative that maintained the minimum loss of life would be found.  
Minimize Other Losses. Other losses a jurisdiction might wish to avoid include disruption of key 
government services, disruption of social networks, and damage to the environment. Including non-
economic factors such as these in the optimization is difficult, as benefits and costs are measured in 
different terms. For other benefits, a number of techniques are available to determine the value a 
community places on those benefits.  
Economic Dependencies. The economy, in general, is affected by the resilience of the built environment. 
The reverse also holds  the resilience of the community depends on the health and resilience of the 
economy. 
243 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
17.5.2. Economic Decision-Making Involving Risk and Uncertainty  
Expected Utility Theory. Economists often approach decision-making with expected utility theory. The 
basic idea is that people will choose the alternative that has the best utility or value for them. The value 
is adjusted to account for both time preference and risk preference. 
Time Preference. The value of consumption depends on when it occurs. Typically, future consumption is 
discounted [Mankiw 2011].  
Risk Preferences. Risk averse individuals prefer to avoid risk. For people who are risk averse, a large 
potential loss has more perceived risk than a number of small losses, even though they add up to the same 
risk value as the single large loss. Someone who is risk neutral would weigh the two equally. 
Risk aversion is handled in economic theory by weighting the large losses more heavily or, equivalently, 
by weighting large gains less heavily. The simplest approach, which is used often in net benefit analyses, 
is to assume the community is risk neutral, and the present expected value is computed. However, when it 
comes to the consequences of disruptive hazard events, it seems unlikely that communities will be risk 
neutral. 
To account for risk preferences, it is necessary to measure those risk preferences. A number of widely-
accepted methods for measuring risk preferences exist [Mankiw 2011]. 
Behavioral Economics and Cognitive Bias. Expected utility maximization [Savage 1972] is a difficult 
problem and, typically, insufficient resources are available to use this approach. Of the several approaches 
available, the most widely accepted is the Heuristics and Biases method. It is based on the idea that 
people use standard shortcutsheuristicsthat work well. However, in cases where they do not work 
well, they will be biased. The biases are generally used to try and identify the heuristics. 
There are a number of identified biases, some of which are relevant here. These include uncertainty, risk, 
overconfidence, and small probability events [Mankiw 2011]. 
Uncertainties. Uncertainties regarding estimates of expected damages and recovery times from hazard 
events fall into two categories. First, there are factors that cannot be known with certainty in advance, 
such as the timing and magnitude of future hazard events. Second, there are parameters, such as costs, 
that are in principal knowable, but are not currently known with certainty. For example, while the cost of 
a particular project can be estimated, the level of uncertainty associated with the estimate can vary and 
will likely increase with the scope of the project. 
Estimates of mitigation costs, recovery costs, and losses all have uncertainty. As plans for community 
resilience are developed and refined, the level of uncertainty may reduce. 
Uncertainty for indirect costs, such as business interruption losses, may be quite significant. In cases 
where estimates have been made, such losses are often as large or larger than direct economic losses. 
However, they are difficult to estimate, due to the lack of data from past events to support estimates. 
17.6. References 
Arup (2014) City Resilience Framework, April The Rockefeller Foundation and Ove Arup & Partners 
International Limited, April, 
http://www.arup.com/~/media/Publications/Files/Publications/C/City_Resilience_Framework_pdf.ashx.  
Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA 2014) Canterbury Wellbeing Index, June 2014, 
Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, Christchurch, New Zealand, http://cera.govt.nz/recovery-
strategy/social/canterbury-wellbeing-index. 
244 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
Community & Regional Resilience Institute, Community Resilience Team (CARRI 2013) Building 
Resilience in Americas Communities: Observations and Implications of the CRS Pilots, Community & 
Regional Resilience Institute (CARRI), Washington, DC, http://www.resilientus.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/CRS-Final-Report.pdf.  
Cutter, S.L. (2014) The Landscape of Resilience Measures, Presentation at the Resilient America 
Roundtable Workshop on Measures of Community Resilience, 
http://sites.nationalacademies.org/cs/groups/pgasite/documents/webpage/pga_152239.pdf. Viewed 
January 25, 2015. 
Cutter, S.L.; B.J. Boruff; and W.L. Shirley (2003) Social vulnerability to environmental hazards, Social 
Science Quarterly, 84 (1):242-261. 
Cutter, S.L.; C.G. Burton; C.T. Emrich (2010) Disaster resilience indicators for benchmarking baseline 
conditions, Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, 7, Article 51, pp. 122. 
Cutter, S.L.; K.D. Ash; and C.T. Emrich (2014) The geographies of community disaster resilience, 
Global Environmental Change, 29:65-77. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA 2014) EPA Explores Interest in Developing Community 
Environmental Resilience Indicators and Indices, EPA Technical Brief, Community Environmental 
Resiliency Index (CERI) Workshop I, May 6-7. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA 2015) Hazus: FEMAs Methodology for Estimating 
Potential Losses from Disasters. https://msc.fema.gov/portal/resources/hazus. Viewed April 19, 2015. 
FEMA, Washington, DC/ 
Foxton, F. and R. Jones (2011) Social Capital Indicators Review, Office for National Statistics 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171766_233738.pdf. Viewed April 19, 2015 
Government Office for Science (2012) Reducing Risks of Future Disasters: Priorities for Decision 
Makers, Final Project Report  Foresight Project, London, England.  
Mankiw, G. (2011) Principles of Economics, Sixth Edition, Cengage Learning. 
National Academies (2012a) Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative, Committee on Increasing 
National Resilience to Hazards and Disasters and Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public 
Policy. Viewed January 25, 2015. 
National Academies (2012b) Disaster Resilience: A National Imperative, Committee on Increasing 
National Resilience to Hazards and Disasters and Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public 
Policy. Viewed January 25, 2015. 
Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission (OSSPAC 2013) The Oregon Resilience Plan: 
Reducing Risk and Improving Recovery for the Next Cascadia Earthquake and Tsunami, OSSPAC, 
Salem, OR.  
PPD-21 (2013) Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-21, The White House, February 12, 2013, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/02/12/presidential-policy-directive-critical-
infrastructure-security-and-resil. 
San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association (SPUR 2009) The Resilient City: What San 
Francisco Needs from its Seismic Mitigation Policies, San Francisco Planning and Urban Research 
Association (SPUR), San Francisco, CA. 
Sempier, T.T., D.L. Swann, R. Emmer, S.H. Sempier, and M. Schneider (2010) Coastal Community 
Resilience Index: A Community Self-Assessment, MAGSP-08-014, November, 
http://www.gulfofmexicoalliance.org/projects/files/83Community_Resilience_Index.pdf. 
245 
I  
Community Resilience Metrics  
Terrorism and Disaster Center at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center (TDC 2012) 
Communities Advancing Resilience Toolkit (CART), University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK. 
The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR 2005) Hyogo Framework for Action 
2005-2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters, World Conference on 
Disaster Reduction, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan, 
http://www.unisdr.org/files/1037_hyogoframeworkforactionenglish.pdf.  
The World Bank (2015) GINI index (World Bank estimate), The World Bank Group, 
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI. Viewed January 15, 2015. 
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR 2012) Making Cities Resilient Report 2012: 
My City is Getting Ready! A Global Snapshot of How Local Governments Reduce Disaster Risk, Second 
Edition, October, The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR).  
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR 2014) Disaster Resilience Scorecard for 
Cities, The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR), Geneva, Switzerland. 
Washington State Seismic Safety Committee Emergency Management Council (2012) Resilient 
Washington State: A Framework for Minimizing Loss and Improving Statewide Recovery after an 
Earthquake, Washington State Seismic Safety Committee Emergency Management Council, Olympia, 
WA. 
246 
I  
Glossary  
18. Glossary 
18.1. List of Terms 
Term/Acronym Definition 
Buildings Individual structures, including its equipment and contents, that house people and 
support social institutions. 
Built Capital Buildings and infrastructure systems, including transportation, energy, water, 
wastewater, and communication and information systems. 
Built Environment All buildings and infrastructure systems. Also referred to as built capital. 
Business Continuity x The capability of an organization or business to continue delivery of products or 
services at acceptable predefined levels following a disruptive incident. (ISO 22301, 
2012). 
x An ongoing process to ensure that the necessary steps are taken to identify the 
impacts of potential losses and maintain viable recovery strategies, recovery plans, 
and continuity of services (NFPA 1600, 2013). 
Clusters A set of buildings and supporting infrastructure systems, not necessarily geographically 
co-located, that serve a common function such as housing, healthcare, retail, etc. 
Communication and Equipment and systems that facilitate communication services, including Internet, 
Information Systems cellular and phone services. 
Community  x In the NPG, the term community refers to groups with common goals, values, or 
purposes (e.g., local businesses, neighborhood groups).  
x In this Guide, however, the term community refers to a place designated by 
geographical boundaries that functions under the jurisdiction of a governance 
structure, such as a town, city, or county. It is within these places that people live, 
work, play, and build their futures. 
Community Resilience x The ability to adapt to changing conditions and withstand and rapidly recover from 
disruption due to emergencies (PPD-8, 2011). 
x The ability to prepare for and adapt to changing conditions and to withstand and 
recover rapidly from disruptions. Resilience includes the ability to withstand and 
recover from deliberate attacks, accidents, or naturally occurring threats or incidents 
(PPD-21, 2013). 
Community Social A complex, organized pattern of beliefs and behavior that meets basic individual, 
Institutions household, and community needs, including family/kinship, government, economy, 
health, education, community service organizations, religious and cultural groups (and 
other belief systems), and the media. 
Critical Facilities Buildings that are intended to remain operational during hazard events and support 
functions and services needed during the short-term phase of recovery. These facilities 
are sometimes referred to as essential buildings. 
247 
I  
Glossary  
Term/Acronym Definition 
Critical Infrastructure Systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so vital to the  that the 
incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating impact on 
security, national economic security, national public health or safety, or any 
combination of those matters (PPD-21, 2013). 
Dependency The reliance of physical and/or social systems on other physical and/or social systems to 
function or provide services. 
Disaster A serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society causing widespread 
human, material, economic or environmental losses which exceed the ability of the 
affected community or society to cope using its own resources (National Science and 
Technology Council, 2005). 
Disruption The consequences of a hazard event that results in loss of services or functions in a 
community. 
Emergency Responders Official and volunteer workers during the short-term phase of recovery, also referred to 
as the response phase. 
Energy Systems Electric power, liquid fuel, and natural gas generation, transmission, and distribution. 
Financial Capital Financial savings, income, investments, and available credit. 
Function The role or purpose of a particular institution (e.g., education, finance, healthcare) 
within a community. 
Functionality Capability of serving the intended function, where the built environment provides an 
operational level that allows a social institution to provide services.  
General Plan A document designed to guide the future actions of a community, with long-range goals 
and objectives for the local government, including land development, expenditure of 
public funds, tax policy (tax incentives), cooperative efforts, and other issues of interest 
(such as farmland preservation, or the rehabilitation of older neighborhoods areas). Also 
referred to as a comprehensive plan, master plan, or land use plan (eXtension, 2015).  
Governance Structures The governing body of a community.  
Hazard A potential threat or an incident, natural or human-caused, that warrants action to 
protect life, property, the environment, and public health or safety, and to minimize 
disruptions of government, social, or economic activities (PPD-21 2013).  
Hazard Event The occurrence of a hazard. 
Hazard Impact The quantification of the community consequences of a hazard through affected area 
and level of disruption measures 
Hazard Level The quantification of the size, magnitude, or intensity of a hazard, such as wind speed, 
seismic ground acceleration, flood elevation, etc.  
Human Caused A hazard event caused by human error or a deliberate action including a terrorist 
Disaster activity.  
248 
I  
Glossary  
Term/Acronym Definition 
Implementation A planned set of actions that taken together will help meet a goal. To achieve 
Strategies community resilience, a set of solutions may include land use planning, codes and 
standards for new construction, and specific retrofit requirements.  
Infrastructure System Physical networks, systems and structures that make up transportation, energy, 
communications, water and wastewater, and other systems that support the functionality 
of community social institutions.  
Life Safety Life safety in the built environment refers to buildings and other structures designed to 
protect and evacuate populations in emergencies and during hazard events. 
Mitigation Activities and actions taken to reduce loss of life and property by lessening the impact 
of hazard events. 
Performance Goals Metrics or specific objectives that define successful performance. For the built 
environment, performance goals include objectives related to desirable features, such as 
occupant protection or time for repairs and return to function.  
Redundancy The use of multiple critical components in a system to increase reliability of system 
performance and function, particularly when one of the multiple components is 
damaged. 
Retrofitting Improving the expected performance of existing buildings and infrastructure systems 
through remedial repairs and measures that often improve system resistance or strength.  
Robustness The ability of a structure or system to continue operating or functioning under a variety 
of demands or conditions.  
Shelter-in-place Safely remaining in a building, e.g., a residence, during or after a hazard event.  
Social Capital Although there is no single definition of social capital, broadly the term refers to social 
networks, the reciprocities that arise from them, and the value of these for achieving 
mutual goals (Schuller, Baron, and Field 2000).  
Stakeholders  All parties that have an interest or concern in an operation, enterprise, or undertaking. 
For community resilience, stakeholders may include representatives from the local 
government, such as community development, public works, and building departments; 
public and private owners and operators of buildings and infrastructure systems; local 
business and industry representatives; representatives of the communitys social 
institutions (e.g., community organizations, nongovernmental organizations, 
business/industry groups, health, education, etc.); and any other stakeholders or 
interested community groups. 
Technological Hazard  A human-caused event due to an accident or human error. 
Transportation Systems Buildings, structures, and networks that move people and goods, including roads, 
bridges, rail systems, airports, coastal or riverine ports, and trucking hubs. 
249 
I  
Glossary  
Term/Acronym Definition 
Vulnerable populations Groups of individuals within a community whose needs may go unmet before or after a 
disaster event, including the elderly, people living in poverty, racial and ethnic minority 
groups, people with disabilities, and those suffering from chronic illness. Additional 
social vulnerabilities can include renters, students, single-parent families, small business 
owners, culturally diverse groups, and historic neighborhoods. 
Wastewater Systems Systems that collect wastewater, move it through a system of pipelines and pump 
stations to a treatment plant, and discharged into a receiving water. 
Water Systems Systems that are supplied by either surface or ground water, treat and store the water, 
and move it to the end user through a system of pipelines. 
Whole Community The National Preparedness Goal defines whole community for preparedness efforts to 
strengthen the security and resiliency of the  and includes individuals, 
communities, the private and nonprofit sectors, faith-based organizations, and Federal, 
state, and local governments.  
Workforce People who provide labor to one or more of the community social, business, industry, 
and economic institutions.  
18.2. List of Acronyms 
Acronym Definition 
100RC 100 Resilient Cities 
AAR After Action Report 
AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
AC Advisory Circular 
ACI American Concrete Institute 
AEP Airport Emergency Plan 
AES Automatic Extinguishing System 
AIA American Institute of Architects 
AISC American Institute of Steel Construction 
ALA American Lifelines Association 
ANSI American National Standards Institute 
APA American Planning Association 
APPA American Public Power Association 
250 
I  
Glossary  
Acronym Definition 
AREMA American Railway Engineering and Maintenance-of-Way Association 
ASCE American Society of Civil Engineers 
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials 
ATC Applied Technology Council 
AWWA American Water Works Association 
BART Bay Area Rapid Transit 
BPS Bulk Power System 
BRIC Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities 
BSI British Standards Institute 
CAIDI Customer Average Interruption Duration Index 
CAIFI Customer Average Interruption Duration Index 
CaLEAP California Energy Assurance Planning 
CAMV Covered Aerial Medium Voltage 
CARRI Community and Regional Resilience Institute 
CART Communities Advancing Resilience Toolkit 
CATV Cable Television 
CCSF City and County of San Francisco 
CEI Critical Energy Infrastructure 
CIP Capital Improvement Plan 
CHP Combined Heat and Power 
CSA Community Service Area 
COLTs Cell on Light Trucks 
CPG Comprehensive Preparedness Guide 
CRF Community Resilience Framework 
CRI Coastal Community Resilience Index 
251 
I  
Glossary  
Acronym Definition 
CRS Community Rating System 
CSO Community Service Organization 
CSRIC Communications Security, Reliability, and Interoperability Council 
DLC RT Digital Loop Carrier Remote Terminal 
DLR Dynamic Line Rating 
DOB Department of Buildings 
DOC  Department of Commerce  
DoD Department of Defense 
DOE Department of Energy 
DOGAMI Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries 
DOT Department of Transportation 
DR Demand Response 
DSM Demand Side Management 
EA Environmental Assessment 
EAS Emergency Alert System 
EBMUD East Bay Municipal Utility District 
EE Energy Efficiency 
EF Enhanced Fujita (scale) 
EIA Energy Information Administration 
EIM Energy Imbalance Markets 
EIS Environmental Impact Statement 
EMS Emergency Medical Services 
EOC Emergency Operations Center 
EOP Executive Office of the President 
EPCRA Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act 
252 
I  
Glossary  
Acronym Definition 
EPA Environmental Protection Agency 
EPFAT Emergency Power Facility Assessment Tool 
EPRI Electric Power Research Institute 
ERO Electric Reliability Organization 
FAA Federal Aviation Administration 
FCC Federal Communications Commission 
FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency 
FERC Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
FHWA Federal Highway Administration 
FRA Federal Railroad Administration 
FTA Federal Transit Administration 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GETS Government Emergency Telecommunications Service 
GIS Geographic Information System 
GTAA Greater Toronto Airports Authority 
HAZMAT Hazardous Materials 
HVAC Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning 
IA Iowa 
IBC International Building Code 
IBHS Institute for Business and Home Safety 
ICC International Code Council 
ICLEI Local Governments for Sustainability 
IEBC International Existing Building Code 
IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
IOU Investor-Owned Utility 
253 
I  
Glossary  
Acronym Definition 
IPAWS Integrated Public Alert and Warning System 
IPP Independent Power Producer 
IRC International Residential Code 
ISO International Organization for Standardization 
ISP Internet Service Provider 
ITS Intelligent Transportation Systems 
IWUIC International Wildland-Urban Interface Code 
IXP Internet Exchange Points 
LADWP Los Angeles Department of Water and Power 
LAWA Los Angeles World Airports 
LRFD Load Factor and Resistance Design 
MAP-21 Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21 Century Act 
MARAD  Maritime Administration 
MCEER Multidisciplinary Center for Earthquake Engineering Reduction 
MSC Mobile Switching Center 
MPO Metropolitan Planning Organization 
MRE Manual for Railway Engineering 
NAPSR National Association of Pipeline Safety Representatives 
NARUC National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners 
NASEO National Association of State Energy Officials 
NCHRP National Cooperative Highway Research Program 
NDRF National Disaster Recovery Framework 
NEBS Network Equipment Building Standards 
NEC National Electric Code 
NEPA National Environmental Protection Act 
254 
I  
Glossary  
Acronym Definition 
NERC North American Electric Reliability Corporation 
NESC National Electric Safety Code 
NFIP National Flood Insurance Program 
NFPA National Fire Protection Association 
NGO Nongovernment Organization 
NHSRC National Homeland Security Research Center  
NIBS National Institute of Building Sciences 
NIPP National Infrastructure Protection Plan 
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology 
NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
NPG National Preparedness Goal 
NRC Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
NRECA National Rural Electric Cooperative Association 
NWS National Weather Service 
NYCC New York Panel on Climate Change 
NYCDEP New York City Department of Environmental Protection 
NYSERDA New York State Energy Research and Development Authority 
OCDI Overseas Coastal Area Development Institute of Japan 
OSSPAC Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission 
PANYNJ Port Authority of New York and New Jersey 
PARRE Program for Risk and Resiliency Evaluation 
PDM Pre-Disaster Mitigation 
PEP Private Entry Point 
PHMSA Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Administration 
PIANC World Association for Waterborne Transport Infrastructure 
255 
I  
Glossary  
Acronym Definition 
PIEVC Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee 
PMU Phasor Measurement Unit 
POTS Plain Old Telephone Service 
PPD-8 Presidential Policy Directive 8 
PPD-21 Presidential Policy Directive 21 
PSAP Public-Safety Answering Point 
PSEG Public Service Enterprise Group 
PV Photovoltaic 
ROW Right of Way 
RPS Renewable Portfolio Standards 
RUS Rural Utilities Service 
SAFETEA-LU Safe Accountable Flexible Efficient Transportation Equity Act 
SAIDI System Average Interruption Duration Index 
SAIFI System Average Interruption Frequency Index 
SCADA Supervisory Control Data Acquisition 
SDWA Safe Drinking Water Act 
SEI Structural Engineering Institute 
SFPUC San Francisco Public Utilities Commission 
SGIP Smart Grid Interoperability Panel 
SLOSH Sea, Lake, and Overland Surges from Hurricanes 
SLR Sea Level Rise 
SPUR San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association 
SSO Standards Setting Organizations 
THIRA Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment 
TIA Telecommunications Industry Association 
256 
I  
Glossary  
Acronym Definition 
TRB Transportation Research Board 
TSP Telecommunications Service Priority 
TVA Tennessee Valley Authority 
UFC United Facilities Criteria 
UN United Nations 
UNIDSR United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction 
UPS Uninterruptible Power Supply 
URI Utility Resilience Index 
US  
USA  of America 
USACE  Army Corps of Engineers 
USGC  Coast Guard 
VOAD Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster 
VSAT Vulnerability Self-Assessment Tool 
WARN Water/Wastewater Agency Response Network 
WEA Wireless Emergency Alerts 
WHEAT Water Health and Economic Analysis Tool 
WPS Wireless Priority Service 
WWTP Wastewater Treatment Plant 
18.3. References 
eXtension (2015) The Purpose of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, eXtension Foundation, 
Centreville, AL, http://www.extension.org/pages/26677/the-purpose-of-the-comprehensive-land-
use-plan#.VTAtaGXD9aQ.  
International Organization for Standardization (ISO 2012) Societal security - Business continuity 
management systems  Requirements, ISO 22301:2012, International Organization for Standardization, 
Geneva, Switzerland. 
257 
I  
Glossary  
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 2013) NFPA 1600: Standard on Disaster/Emergency 
Management and Business Continuity Programs, 2013 Edition, National Fire Protection Association 
(NFPA), Quincy, MA. 
National Science and Technology Council (2005) Grand Challenges for Disaster Reduction  A Report of 
the Subcommittee on Disaster Reduction, National Science and Technology Council, Executive Office of 
the President, Washington, DC. 
PPD-21 (2013) Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-21, The White House, February 12, 2013, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/02/12/presidential-policy-directive-critical-
infrastructure-security-and-resil. 
PPD-8 (2011) Presidential Policy Directive, PPD-8  National Preparedness, The White House, March 
30, 2011, http://www.dhs.gov/presidential-policy-directive-8-national-preparedness. 
Schuller, T.; S. Baron; and J. Field (2000) Social Capital: A Review and Critique. Social Capital: 
Critical Perspectives, edited by Stephen Baron, John Field, and Tom Schuller, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, pp. 1-38. 
 
258 

)