


Introduction
The Washington State Seismic Safety Committee (SSC) initiated a project to study and prepare a policy paper with the purpose of providing a framework for improving Washingtons resilience when earthquakes occur. Such a framework includes more effective seismic mitigation policies and recommendations for legislation and policy changes to improve and enhance statewide seismic safety.  The document will be used to facilitate long-term implementation of seismic risk reduction policies across the state with the goal of making the state resilient in a 50-year time frame.  To complete this effort, the SSC formed a subcommittee called the Resilient Washington State (RWS) subcommittee.
The RWS subcommittee has been formulating a plan of action to complete this effort since the start of 2010. For the initial inspiration, the subcommittee looked to a similar effort undertaken for the City of San Francisco by the San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association (SPUR). The final SPUR documents for the Resilient City project in San Francisco can be found at http://www.spur.org/resilient_city. Unlike the SPUR document, the RWS effort will be focused on statewide impacts.
In order to draw upon the expertise of key stakeholders and solicit their input and involvement in this project, the RWS subcommittee facilitated the Resilient Washington State Workshop on September 17, 2010. This one-day event was held at Gould Hall at the University of Washington in Seattle. Forty-five peoplerepresenting local, state, and federal agencies, university departments, and private businessesattended the workshop. In addition, a number of those who were invited, but who were unable to attend the workshop, expressed interest in participating in subsequent meetings of the workgroups.  
Objective of the Workshop
The primary objective of the workshop was to allow the members of the subcommittee to begin working with key experts and stakeholders to:
 Evaluate the current condition of infrastructure in the state relative to earthquake resilience.
 Develop targets for the desired level of performance.
 Develop target timeframes for the restoration of services.
 Prepare recommendations for statewide action to achieve desired targets. (These recommendations will be presented in a clear and concise document.)
The discussions begun at this workshop will continue over the next several months as the participants continue to meet in their workgroups to address these points. A second workshop is planned for the spring of 2011. This will bring all the participants together again for the purpose of further refining and synthesizing their work. 
Overview and Organization of the Workshop
Prior to the workshop, the Resilient Washington State subcommittee developed a definition of resilience, a set of values to guide deliberations related to resilience, and an outline of the sectors and components that make up the critical infrastructures of the state. 
The RWS subcommittee defined a resilient state as one that maintains services and livelihoods after an earthquake. In the event that services and livelihoods are disrupted, recovery occurs rapidly, with minimal social disruption, and results in a new and better condition. The values that the subcommittee identified in accordance with this definition are:
Property Protection: Public and private property within the State of Washington should be built, retrofitted, or rebuilt to minimize earthquake-induced damage. This includes proper design and construction of both structural and non-structural elements.
Economic Security: Residents and businesses within the State of Washington should have access to income opportunities to meet basic needs before and soon after an earthquake. This includes sufficient employment opportunities, market access, distribution capacity, and supplier access.
Environmental Protection: The natural resources and ecosystems of Washington State should be managed in such a way as to minimize earthquake-induced damage. This includes the use of proper growth management, accident response capacity, and industrial safety measures. 
Life Safety and Human Health: Residents of the State of Washington should not suffer life-threatening injuries from earthquake-induced damage or develop serious illness from lack of emergency medical care after an earthquake. This includes enforcing and updating building codes, eliminating non-structural hazards, and ensuring continuity of emergency health care.
Community Continuity: All communities within the State of Washington should have the capacity to maintain their social networks and livelihoods after an earthquake disaster. This includes prevention of social-network disruption, social discrimination, and community bias.
At the workshop, the participants were given these definitions and were assigned to one of four workgroups. Each workgroup was assigned one of the sectors of Washingtons infrastructure (the sectors and their components are listed below).  
Utilities
 Drinking water
 Wastewater
 Electricity
 Fuel
 Information and communication technology
Critical services
 Law enforcement
 Emergency response
 Hospital care
 Education
 Sheltering
 Government administration
Transportation
 Roads and bridges
 Airports
 Seaports
 Rail
 Transit
Housing and economic development 
 Finance and banking
 Commerce (commercial facilities)
 Real estate and construction
 Manufacturing (industrial facilities)
 Planning and community development
 Housing
After the introductory session of the workshop, during which the participants were presented with overviews of the work of the Seismic Safety Committee, the earthquake hazards affecting the state, and the Resilient Washington State Initiative (see Appendix C), the participants were asked to separate into their workgroups and to take part in breakout sessions. Each breakout session was facilitated by a member of the RWS subcommittee and each followed the same basic agenda and facilitation guidelines. 
The questions used to guide discussions in the breakout sessions included the following: 
 In what ways are the Resilient Washington State values important to the states resilience? (Each group was asked to consider this specifically in relation to the sector the group was assigned.) How do the values relate to the restoration of critical sectors and components?
 Considering the RWS values, what additional components should be included in the sector that your group was asked to consider? Are there any components that should not be there?
 What are the externalities (outside sectors and components) that influence restoration of the components within the breakout groups sector? How do these externalities influence restoration? 
 Is our states capacity to restore the sector and its components adequate? Why or why not?
 Considering the scenario ground motions, what is the current capacity for restoration (expressed in days, weeks, or months) of the particular components and of the sector? What information or studies are needed to make such an assessment?
 What are the restoration targets (expressed in days, weeks, or months)?
 Considering the current restoration capacity and the restoration targets for each RWS value (either qualitatively or quantitatively), discuss what is required to get current capacity to match each target (assuming the target exceeds the current capacity).
These were followed by questions designed to help participants begin to assess and conclude their discussions: 
 What issues stood out?
 What were you most surprised or concerned to realize?
 What does this mean for the State of Washington, its residents, and its businesses?
 What should or can be done?
In addition, each workgroup was asked to select a leader to help organize and facilitate the groups subsequent meetings and discussions.
The workshop participants reassembled in a final wrap-up session at the end of the afternoon. This allowed them to present to the larger group the key points of each workgroups discussions and to make additional observations and comments. At the conclusion of the workshop, the participants were invited to continue their discussions at a social hour sponsored by Degenkolb Engineers. 



After introductions, the participants in this workgroup discussed issues related to the RWS values. 
Discussion of the Values
It was remarked that retrofitting all facilities within 50 years is a pipedream. 
The workgroup identified their top three priorities as Life Safety, Property Protection, and Economic Safety. While Environmental Protection was considered important, some thought it best not to include it officially. 
It was observed that a risk-based approach is not mentioned in connection with the RWS initiative. Many participants in this group agreed that the initiative and policy document should be risk-based. 
The participants also noted that there are lots of interrelationships among the RWS values and sectors.
Additional questions included: Where do preparation and advanced preparation fit into the values? Where do education and training fit into the values? 
It was observed that the state cannot minimize risk down to zero percent. We need to do what makes sense based on cost-effectiveness.
It was argued that Cultural Resources need to be included either in the RWS values or in the sectors. Some believed this fits best as part of the values, maybe under Environmental Protection or Community Continuity.
It was noted that continuity of government is not called out in the values. Is ensuring government operations a value? A goal? Most considered it a goal and thus suggested that it be fitted into the RWS sectors (i.e., as part of government administration under the critical services heading).
Another question discussed was how do the values relate? Does it make sense to have different capacities and targets for each value? Do the values apply to all sectors? Some values play larger roles and apply varyingly, but overall, the values make sense and are applicable to different capacities and targets for each sector.
It was noted that timeframes (or phases) strongly relate to different values. For example, short-term planning might be associated with property protection, and long-term planning with community continuity; however, there is not a one-to-one relationship between a particular value and a particular timeframe.
It was noted that priorities and values will differ depending on the viewpoint of different stakeholderscompanies and jurisdictions will not have the same priorities and values as the state. How do we integrate or account for this? How does the state influence stakeholders to meet the states targets, particularly if these targets are not the same as the stakeholders targets? It is important to build into the RWS initiative ways for both the private and public sectors to plug into it.
It was observed that many people articulate the idea that environmental protection is a priority, but this sentiment is not always reliable, and the priority of environmental protection is not always demonstrated. In an emergency, many will use or do whatever is necessary to maintain health/life, regardless of the environmental impacts. 
Participants also asked how values of life safety (or urgency) and building-back-better or pre-event mitigation can be reconciled. How could this be facilitated or incentivized for the private sector (versus the public sector)? An example is getting power back quickly by re-hanging lines versus burying power lines. Should buildings be built back to code or to a higher level of performance? Should this be required and for what stakeholders (e.g., public vs. private)?
It was suggested that the RWS subcommittee needs to rank the values. This led to additional questions and discussion: How should agencies and organizations balance or prioritize the RWS values? Should different values have different priorities during different timeframes after an event? Should there be public education about the values so that people understand when one service or one area is prioritized over another during a disaster?
How do we create resilience?
 Rebuilding better after?
 Mitigate before?
 Respond more efficiently?
 Faster recovery?
 Redundancy?
 Increase adaptive capacity?
 Top-down? Bottom-up?
 Does the RWS or state have a preference for types of resilience strategies?
It was suggested that one of these lenses (above) be used to filter the RWS initiative. Most participants in this group preferred to increase the capacity of resilience from the very beginning mitigation and preparedness rather than improve response and recovery.
It was also suggested that the RWS project should take a consequence-based approach; and it was noted that the RWS initiative will need to balance demand between the public and the politicians.
General Discussion of Sectors and Components
It was suggested that the list of sectors makes it unclear whether the RWS initiative is focused on infrastructure or services. Both should be included and be articulated. 
It was observed that food supply network (both emergency food and the day-to-day system) is missing from the sectors on the list. It was suggested that food network be added as a component of the critical services sector.
It was suggested that the sector assigned to this workgroup be changed from utilities to utility lifelines. This same suggestion might be applied to transportation (i.e. transportation lifelines).
The group further suggested:
 Changing the drinking water component to domestic water supply so that it includes both potable water and the water supply for fire-fighting.
 Changing the label of the health care component to hospital care.
 Breaking down the fuel component by type: natural gas, liquid fuel, and renewables.
 Adding drainage to wastewater so that the component is called wastewater and drainage.
 Adding waste management/solid waste as a component of the utilities lifelines sector.
The group noted that there is no mention of flood controls or levees in any of the sectors. The facilitator suggested adding flood control as a component. There seemed to be some agreement, but not overwhelming support. Inclusion of levees seemed to be clearly supported. Dams could be associated with components like electricity or flood control.
The group also discussed classifying components by their intended or actual end use. For example, energy could be broken down by residential, industrial, and transportation. Potentially, all utilities could be classified into types of residential, industrial, and transportation, or other uses.
Major interdependencies for the utility sector include the need for functioning roads and bridges so that electricity providers can make repairs.
Many in the group pointed out that infrastructure vulnerability analysis and interdependency analysis has been done by the private sector and by some local, state, and federal agencies. Someone suggested that the state has done some kind of infrastructure analysis and prioritized the infrastructure: Transportation was considered the first priority; energy was the second.
It was noted that the state has restoration teams, including law enforcement, an energy team, debris removal, and so on. Debris removal and management is not explicitly listed within the RWS sectors. The participants assumed that this is part of emergency services, but if not, they thought it should be explicitly included.
It was observed that employees concerns about their families constitute a significant externality for restoring utilities. If employees do not know their families are okay, they may not show up for work. Family should be included somehow in the list of sectors.
It was noted that several utilities agencies reference ISO standards, but that this is different for each region; these standards cannot be (or are not) required.
Finally, it was asked: What is an okay level of service delivery for each component and with respect to each value after an event?
Discussion of Capacity and Targets
The capacity for restoration is really the capacity of the world. That is, restoration does not depend exclusively on the capacity of the affected area, but on the actions of outside actors and our ability to mobilize this greater capacity to assist the affected area. We do not have complete control over this capacity. What can we influence and be aware of? Access to the capacity of the world becomes a function of transportation and contractual devices.
It might be wise to separate out a Cascadia scenario from a crustal scenario, because these scenarios affect the capacity of the world (nearby areas for mutual aid) dramatically differently.
Capacity is related to communication. Thus, the interoperability of information communications and of technology is a major concern. Also, communication capacity can be hindered by a silos-based approach. A wireless mesh network would be a resilient communication solution. Of course, interoperability is a major theme of many other efforts.
Some suggested that the restoration capacity for electricity is adequate. One participant mentioned that restoration should be about 50% of the population back online each day after a disruption (on average). Others disputed this and questioned whether it was derived from events in California or from non-disaster disruptions. There was agreement that restoration of electricity is dependent on post-disaster demand. The question becomes whether demand will outstrip supply in different timeframes after the event. The same hazard that reduces supply potentially reduces demand.
Any utility or services dependent on pipelines will be compromised in areas of liquefiable soils. This includes water, fuel, and natural gas.
It was asked whether the state knows the vulnerability of the different components of the utilities sector. Some stakeholders must have done some analysis. The state needs to determine what has been done and compile it. Another question posed was, how will the state get vulnerability analysis results from private sector stakeholders, who likely have the information, but who may not want to provide access to it?  The state can focus on the major players in the sector and determine if an analysis has been done, what the analysis revealed, whether they have a plan in place, how fast they expect to restore service, and whether or not they have and perform restoration simulations/exercises. However, if the focus is just on major players, the state may miss important small ones. For example, without dry cleaners, hospitals may not be able to provide adequate services.
It was observed that building codes are only relevant to buildings; thus, in theory, buildings are resilient with respect to the life safety value. For the utilities sector, the most important parts of the infrastructure are special structures like pipes, towers, and sub-stations.
It was asked whether it is possible to require the public sector to have co-op plans? Big agencies/services should already be required to have them. 
In the short term, alternative systems or strategies can be used instead of repairing damaged infrastructure. Water for fire can use alternative systems that are put in place, rather than replacing old pipes. City Light might use rolling black outs. Evacuation could be a possibility if services are not adequate.
For restoration targets, it was asked whether one should think about where the most good can be done. That is, where can limited resources do the most good? Someone will always say, Why was I not the first? It is therefore necessary to weigh the community benefit first. 
It was also observed that meeting restoration targets means facilitating jurisdiction and agency coordination; and it was noted that it is hard economically to require stakeholders to meet performance standards.


After introductions, the participants in this workgroup discussed issues related to the RWS values. 
Discussion of the Values
In connection with the value Life Safety and Human Health, the participants suggested including the concept of community well-being; also the need to guide a community-wide response toward recovery following an earthquake. Particular mention was made of the psychology of disaster: people do not behave normally after a major disasterthey experience severe stress and anxiety and stay in fight or flight mode. Some of the anticipated consequences include a greater need for foster care, an increase in domestic violence, and a higher divorce rate. There was debate about whether to include this discussion under Life Safety and Human Health or under Community Continuity, and it was noted that there is overlap between the categories. It was noted that, in this state, disaster mental health falls under the Department of Social and Health Services (DSHS). This drew the discussion toward the list of sectors and componentsthe participants suggested making public health and human services a separate component (not the same component as Hospital Care).
It was noted that emergency response is multi-tierednot just medical, fire, and police (see the list of sectors and components). The participants asked whether emergency response/preparation should be built more explicitly into the values. They suggested that the outline should somehow capture the full spectrum of all services that must be engaged in response. No one piece will operate by itself.  
In relation to Community Continuity, the participants also anticipated a culture shift as a result of the highly stressed response of people following a destructive earthquake. They considered general agriculture and the macro-level of market access (getting produce to market). The participants debated the relative merits of community action versus a top-down approach: For some, the ideal is to move toward community-led changethe community defines resilience. 
In relation to Economic Security, the participants stressed the need for business continuity plans to help community emergency response. They thought it important that businesses/industries/organizations be encouraged to identify in advance what they will need in order to function following a disaster. 
In the discussion of Environmental Protection, it was noted that growth management should be clarified. It was anticipated that this will be a challenge politically. Some also wanted to clarify that accident response capacity is primarily about Hazmat response (e.g. wastewater spillage, leaking fuel lines, and so on). One suggestion was to add explicit language to the values to address the concept of restoration of the environment following disasterthat is, ecological restoration (accept that the natural environment will in some respects change permanently, but that we should restore what can be restored and plan to rebuild in a way that is green).
Moreover, it was noted that most emergency response is set up for more limited disasters; it will be necessary to build capacity overall. 
General Discussion of Sectors and Components
The Critical Services Workgroup suggested that food be added to the list of components and that natural gas be added to the fuel component.
Some participants suggested referring specifically to non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in connection with sheltering and emergency services (NGOs cross sectors). They also suggested adding a reference to managing spontaneous volunteersthat is, listing volunteer management separately as a component. Another thought was to refer to or incorporate the cluster process used by the UN.  (A lead agency, such as a UN agency or the Red Cross, is appointed for each cluster; there are clusters for things like shelter and for vulnerable populations. The lead agencies come up with unified processes/standards/objectives to coordinate the NGOs and emergent volunteers.) 
One participant asked why earthquakes were being addressed and not other hazards. This arose specifically in connection with the agricultural sector, because it might be more impacted by hazards other than earthquakes. Other participants observed that a major earthquake will impact agriculture, especially transportation and the movement of produce. 
The participants continued the discussion by looking at the range of scenarios that could impact the state at a state-wide level: 
Issues Related to Emergency Response. The group anticipated that emergency response will be variable across the state: In some areas it is already very good, while in others it is non-existent. They thought concerns should include the physical structures of fire stations (will they stand up to an earthquake and remain functional?); staffing (firefighters must be rotated during an emergency response); road access (how to get trucks around); water supplies for fighting fires; and the means of shutting off utilities systems. It was noted that most fire fighting systems are set up to fight one fire at a time and that it will be necessary to extend capacity via collaboration; to do this, we need to set up plans and agreements in advance. 
The group also discussed communications during emergency response; responders need access to:
 A map that is set up early on to indicate the locations and extent of damage.
 A system of communication among responders and access to information.
 In-state mutual aid agreements. 
As part of planning and preparations, the group agreed that it is necessary to identify and define the players. 
Issues Related to Sheltering. The group asked whether this component should instead be called mass care, of which sheltering is a part. Most of the time, sheltering will only be needed for a percentage of the populationemergency planning usually assumes 10% will require temporary emergency shelter. (The long-term goal of resilience planning is to have permanent housing that is designed to withstand earthquakes, so 10% might then be an accurate estimate. Currently, it is likely that more than 10% of the population of a given area will require shelter).
Sheltering should be understood to include temporary housing, mass feeding, mass care, and alternate care sites. Currently, sheltering/mass care falls under ESF 6: the Department of Health and Human Services (DSHS) is the lead agency. DSHS is going to need additional funding to be able to perform this role (the Red Cross used to be the lead organization for sheltering/mass care, but this is no longer the case). The group suggested investigating further what ESF 6 does to prepare for response nowhow does this look across the state? It was predicted that there will be a lot of variability from one local site to another. 
It was also noted that many people with pets will not go to shelters at which pets are not allowedthis means there is a need for shelters that do permit pets. 
On the whole, the points related to sheltering looked fairly well defined (federalstatelocalNGO), and the facilitator reminded the group to look at the big picture for resilience: What is in place now? What is missing? It was observed that many of the sheltering issues must be mandated to get small jurisdictions to implement them. The participants agreed that it is necessary to make rational, comprehensive policy recommendations.
Another question that was asked was whether the state has a well-thought out plan for mass evacuation. While evacuation is planned in the case of tsunamis and volcanic eruptions, it is not planned for earthquakes, for which there is too little advanced warning.
Issues Related to Hospitals: The participants recommended revising the list of sectors and components: Under the critical services sector, replace the component hospital care with the following two components: (1) health and medical care (this includes hospitals) and (2) social services. 
Following a major earthquake, hospitals will be overloaded, but a lot of strengthening is currently going on. To function, hospitals need good buildings, transportation access, utilities (stand-by generators), and staffing. (All components need these things, but maybe not to the same degree or within the same time periods during recovery.)
Hospitals are overloaded now. Because capacity has already been reached, an emergency situation will require access to alternative facilities. A lot of other parts of the state (and beyond) depend on west-side (King County) hospitals. One question was whether or not this jurisdiction should purchase portable hospitals. (Some states have done this, but Washington has not.) Washington does have military resources to help provide medical care, but this is not sufficient to address the level of need following a major earthquake affecting King County facilities. We do not have hospital capacity to address certain scenariose.g. Seattle area impacts. Another big issue is staffinggetting people to show up. Emergency responders and medical staff may be cut off or have other obligations (e.g. family) that draw them away from work.
Because access to hospitals will also depend on the clearing of debris, someone asked how this will be handled. King County and the City of Seattle have debris removal in their plans: pre-approved places for dumping debris. How fast this can be done depends on other infrastructure.
Just-in-time supplies also constitute an issue of concern for medical facilitiesthe systems that deliver supplies are commercial, and there is no way to insist that these private businesses retrofit, make plans, etc. 
Gap in care: There are some segments of the population that will need special assistance/care following a scenario earthquake, but that fall between what the Red Cross volunteer care shelters can deal with and what the other medical facilities will be able and willing to accept. (There was some discussion about whether to attempt to address gaps in care that affect a relatively small number of people or to focus resources on planning and response aimed more broadly at caring for the majority.)  
It was also noted that mortuary services will have to be addressed. Responsibility for this is divided between coroners, medical examiners, and local public health. Some participants thought mass casualties should be added to the list and addressed under the heading critical services.
Issues Related to Education. The red-tagging of school buildings after an earthquake will lead to day-care crises for parents, and this in turn will have economic impacts. Communities will need alternate facilities so parents have the ability to return to work and kids will experience no gap in their education. Schools must be rebuilt or the neighborhoods they serve will not recover from the disaster. Some schools serve as shelters in the event of a disaster: often this is by agreement with the local government. It is necessary to consider how a shelter-school will be returned to its primary purpose as a school. Before- and after-school care facilities are also necessary for many parents to continue working. These programs may need to take on more responsibilitythey need to have plans (currently, most lack plans).
A mental health issue is also involved in the quick return of kids to school. Moreover, it was noted that schools are a critical service/care center for kids: For many children, schools are a key source of food. Schools are also a place where it is possible to keep tabs on kids who are at risk.
Schools are funded to provide 180 days of education per year. Because of the nature of this funding, schools are disposed to shut down rather than attempt to provide education in a partial or ad hoc way. Communities can get FEMA funds for impacted schools, but it is necessary to educate school administrators regarding the process required to get these funds. 
Also important to schools is the transportation infrastructurea means of bussing kids to school. Some areas have plans to redistribute kids to schools. Such plans may be based on students physical access to schools (ability to walk or be transported to more accessible schools). 
If schools are not damaged, how quickly can kids be returned to school? The participants agreed that we need to arrive at a current estimate. 
Another question that was raised was whether home rule is an obstacle to resilience, though it was also remarked that RCW 38 52 does give the governor extraordinary power in an emergency. One compromise may be to get neighboring districts to work out agreements with relevant state agencies regarding emergency response planning/preparation.
Emergency response planning should also address earthquake drills. Currently, drills are conducted when kids are in their classrooms. Drills should also be conducted when the students are being transported to and from school on the bus. Bus drivers should be trained, informed, and supplied to ensure they have what they need to look after kids in this event. 
Issues Related to Government Administration. Key functions include keeping financial records to track what is spent during the response to the event; also, facilitating and leading the recovery efforts. This involves the interplay of functions and agencies, and continuity of operations planning. Some aspects of emergency planning still need to be worked out: For example, some agencies have attempted to plan what to do about their personnel following a disaster, but the agencies often lack authority to implement such decisions (e.g. authority to allow personnel to work from home).
One suggestion was to engage policy makers in mitigation policies ahead of time. It was observed that political leaders often do not attend or participate, and many are not well informed about disaster planning and emergency response issues. 
Government needs to provide consistent, accurate, and timely communication with the public. To ensure that the messages they give to the public are consistent, agencies should have a person with authority sign-off on information for official public announcements. Part of the challenge is that most agencies are spread thinthey do not have enough personnel to cover all functions.
Continuing the Critical Services Discussion
The goal is to engage in four or five meetings over the next five months to continue discussions and develop input. 
The breakout group agreed to begin this process by having participants input their ideas to a Sharepoint (or comparable) structure. They will then arrange to have a face-to-face meeting to discuss the work and make revisions. Rebekah Green volunteered to set up the structure; the other participants agreed to fill in the structure. 



The participants in this workgroup began their discussion by identifying key gaps that affect the states resilience. They also articulated a set of goals for the transportation sector and discussed what is needed to meet those goals. 
Gaps Affecting the States Resilience
 The state currently lacks a comprehensive plan to make Washington more resilient.
 The seismic safety of Washingtons schools needs to be improved.
Goals of the Transportation Workgroup
 Seek development of a long-term planning document aimed at improving the states resilience 
 Fill in the gaps (see above) 
 Build on past work 
 Stress the importance of ports and the connectedness of systems
 Develop tools and assess resources
 Stress the importance of moving freight and create detours for trucks
 Begin drafting a framework to initiate policy
Discussion of What Needs to Be Done to Achieve Resilience
 Make a specific timeline that includes costs.
A. Create a timeline (similar to that outlined in the SPUR reports) for bridge and road repair during the response phase. For example, the repair of high-traffic bridges, such as SR 520, should be a much higher priority than small county bridges for which detours are possible. Assess location, usage, population and other important factors to help create this timeline.
B. Such a timeline is important for both mitigation and response.  
C. Prioritize the importance of a given road or bridge.
 Develop a culture of safety in Washington: Use education to move beyond what is now merely a general awareness of the states seismicity. Start with schools and promote awareness amongst friends, family, and community. 

 Incentivize mitigation.
A. Develop the economic vitality incentive:
 The standard of living is very high in Washington; we want to keep it that way.
 A disaster situation can result in the loss of Washingtons economic standing. This happened to Kobe, Japan, after it suffered a devastating earthquake: Prior to this disaster, Kobe was the worlds 6th largest port; now, it is only the 15th. Kobe can never regain its previous economic standing. Such a scenario can be a substantial incentive for politicians.    
 Sustain livelihoods.
 Create jobs.
B. Develop the social incentive:
 Utilize existing parts of the community, such as churches and volunteer groups, to promote and build awareness of disaster risk reduction (DRR).
 Develop resiliency at the neighborhood level.
 Publish policy pamphlets and what to do scenarios.
 Work on creating stronger regional social bonds and incorporate new stakeholders.
C. Incentivize through connectedness of systems:
 Stress that Alaska is reliant on Washington for food; this constitutes a national incentive.
 Note that if the gas pipeline breaks, SeaTac can potentially shut down for days.
 Point out that King County relies on one bus station for communication with the entire fleet.
 Stress that, because everything is interconnected, an earthquake will affect many stakeholders. 
 Recognize the need for unified communications. 
A. Should a large hazard event occur, our reliance on cell phones and the internet for communication could be problem: The use could exceed the capacity of these systems. 
B. We should create a common radio station, website (Twitter, Facebook), or some type of communication that we can rely and depend on if other systems fail.
 Utilize existing information: We must collate and adapt past studies and research on subjects related to earthquakes, seismic safety, and resilience. (For example, WSDOT has existing information about the vulnerabilities of roads in different counties.) Once such existing information has been compiled and synthesized, it can be used to create the policy framework.
 Develop more research on the logistics of debris removal and the movement of large trucks and emergency vehicles in the period following a hazard event.
 Identify options in the event of particular transportation system failures.
 Identify challenges related to mitigation, paying particular attention to regional capacity (e.g. King County holds all of our medical capacity).
 Emphasize the need for science-based decisions. (The nature of earthquakes is uncertain in a world that has come to expect certainty; this creates a stronger need for science-based decisions.)
General Discussion about the Transportation Sector 
The workgroup noted that transportation underlies all factors and values, because all services depend on it. 
 The functionality of transportation will be crucial during the response to an earthquake:
A. The transportation system is important for the movement of emergency vehicles and people, and for the removal of debris.
B. Emergency management personnel (EMOs) and disaster risk reduction (DRR) specialists must be able to get home to their loved one before they start working on response.
C. The state is heavily reliant on I-5 and I-90.
 The major ports of Seattle, Tacoma, and Everett are all exposed to faults (the Seattle, Tacoma, and Whidbey Island faults respectively).  
 WSDOT has a strong inventory of bridges and roads. We must utilize this capacity and continue to build on and compile these past works.
 Washingtons pipelines and ferries should be considered part of the transportation sector.
 A breakdown of the supply chain will cause the post-earthquake recovery to halt.
The participants also discussed the following general observations and questions: 
 We need to begin with inspections and damage assessments, and then create a needs assessment.
 During the Seattle fault scenario, would we have the capacity to feed the city? Would the city need to be evacuated?
A. We must develop more hazard scenarios.
B. We must check our capacity.
 We should use social media, such as Facebook, to increase interest and raise awareness.
 If healthcare is currently at full capacity, how can we deal with a large-scale hazard event?
 Resilience starts with mitigation.
 The way to influence elected officials is through influencing their constituents. 
 Do the RWS values need to be prioritized?

Workgroup #4: Housing and Economic Development
FACILITATOR: JOHN SCHELLING                                                        NOTE TAKER: HEATHER DALKE
1.
J. Daniel Dolan
Washington State University
2.
David Gonzalez
Degenkolb Engineers
3.
Kurt Hardin

3.
Gary Mansell
Boeing
5.
Anindita Mitra
CREA Affiliates
6.
John Schelling

7.
Joan Scofield
WA Office of Insurance Commission
8.
Helen Sinclair
(Massey University, GNS Science, New Zealand)
9.
Nate Wood
USGS

John Schelling welcomed the group and thanked members for participating. The group members introduced themselves and provided overviews of their backgrounds and expertise. 
During the introduction phase of the breakout session, the group discussed the current readiness of the state to prepare and respond to damaging earthquakes that will strike Washington and the effects such earthquake will have. The group then compared the current status to what an ideal, effective mitigation processaimed at reducing dramatically the resources needed for responsemight look like. Such mitigation will facilitate a much more rapid recovery and ensure a greater overall resilience to these events. 
Issues to Be Considered
The group then cited issues that need to be considered as part of the Resilient Washington State Initiative process. 
1. Economic Restoration and Recovery Project
 It is important to restore social areas first (jobs, housing, schools) as this will permit a sense of new normalcy and allow people to get back to work. 
 It is important during this time not only to keep public and private areas safe, but also to ensure that people feel safe, as the perception of safety is as important as actual safety. 
2. Land-use Management: What is important for the community?
 Health impacts and other public health issues need to be considered within the context of this process. Ensuring utility services during and after earthquakes will be essential to reducing the potential for health emergencies and outbreaks. 
 Pre-planning should occur and can be incorporated into existing land use and zoning regulations, as well as building codes, to maximize effectiveness. 
1. A key component of this will require an increased emphasis on educating the public as to what their risks are and what they need to do personally to become more prepared for these events. 
2. There also needs to be recognition that response will be slow due to the fact that needs will exceed capabilities immediately following a damaging earthquake.
3. Insurance: Recovery
 Banks and insurance are essential after a disaster to get the economy back on track and to permit people access to financial resources. Without access to money, people cannot recover effectively. These groups need to be heavily engaged in the process. 
 Some financial institutions have mobile branches that can be made available so people can get access to cash and deposit insurance payments, when applicable. 
 It will be important through this planning process to determine how financial resources get handled after a disaster and what can be done to ensure effective use of these resources to speed recovery. 
Dr. Nate Wood noted that the state and the communities themselves need to know how vulnerable they are to earthquakes. In addition to the earthquake component of a disaster, it is also important to understand the potential issues from tsunamis that will impact the state and local jurisdictions. 
Gary Mansell and Dan Dolan discussed various options for mitigating structures to improve their performance in various earthquakes. They noted that this is primarily accomplished through effective earthquake design of buildings and structures, which is part of the adopted building codes. 
It was also noted, however, that several issues arise in connection with this approach: Codes can quickly become outdated and there is always new scientific information that comes in. It can be difficult to keep up with the new seismic information, and then there is inevitably a lag in getting that information approved and adopted into better seismic provisions in the building codes. 
Discussion of Values
In considering Property Protection, the participants in this workgroup stressed the importance of private industries for the recovery of communities. They considered it critical not only that the buildings survive the event, but also the valuable things inside the buildings. The loss of the contents of the buildings is especially hard on the manufacturing sector, which must deal with the high cost of replacing damaged equipment and stock. 
As they discussed Community Continuity, the participants in this workgroup emphasized the importance of quality of life. In connection with this, they considered the following questions: 
 If one survives a disaster, what will ones life be like after the event?
 Will communities be divided or will they come together?
Key facets of Community Continuity include the swift recovery of communications and educationspecifically, schools. The participants discussed how people are likely to respond to the challenge of being without power and communication systems. They noted that the restoration of schools following an earthquake is the way to kick-start community continuity. The closing of schools significantly impacts the recovery of the community, because many parents will be unable to go to work while their children are out of school. As a result, the community will lose critical employees (nurses, etc.) and key services (such as healthcare). 
The group also discussed the need for statewide land planning. As an example, they looked at the town of Hamilton in Skagit County, a tight-knit community that was devastated by flooding. It was suggested that the risks faced by communities can be translated into opportunities for the rejuvenation and economic development of those communities.
As part of the discussion of land planning, the group also considered the issues involved in long-term versus short-term mitigation strategies. For example, should a community that is at risk due to the effects of climate change (such as rising sea levels) merely build a bigger wall or invest in moving a vulnerable neighborhood?
The group discussed how best to achieve social equilibrium and to get various facets of the community back on their own. 
The workgroup discussed the question of who has the authority to say whether or not to rebuild and who makes it happen. It was noted that after the Nisqually earthquake, Boeing chose to demolish damaged buildings in Renton rather than repair them. This was because of the estimated cost of the repairs. This resulted in some loss of the communitys manufacturing capacity, although it came back in time. It was remarked that businesses will spend some additional resources, but that they need assurances that other sources will be available. 
Also in connection with the issue of rebuilding, the group noted the following questions and ideas:
 There must be follow-through on the part of elected officials and state agencies. Several examples were cited in which groups should: walk the talk or dont talk. 
 Does the political will exist to address the hard issues, such as whether or not rebuilding should occur in some places following a disaster?
 Learn from mistakes: We need to change behavior or mitigate the environment.
The need for strong government was noted, but it was also observed that recovery will depend upon the resilience of the community and that the members of the community should be encouraged to depend on themselves and not on the government. The workgroup proposed the inclusion of a 6th Value: a Culture of Resilience: People have to think they are resilient. Such a culture of resilience enables the other five values. It involves a paradigm shift, a belief that people within the state will adopt this value.
Most people currently have an expectation that they should be taken care of. This expectation should be replaced with the belief that everyone needs to take personal action. People also need to believe that such action will have a positive result: If I do this, then it can help the outcome. It is necessary to convince folks that making improvements will help enhance resilience when a hazard occurs.
Currently, there is no incentive for homeowners to undertake mitigation. It was noted that many of those whose homes are damaged in a disaster expect a check from the government to compensate for their losses. It should be made clear that a check after the event does not help a homeowner recover his/her quality of life (a little bit more money does not bring back happiness after losing a home). 
Discussion of Other Key Issues 
The group identified the following as key issues to consider in connection with the recovery of a community after a disaster (i.e. an earthquake or tsunami):
Timeframe. What is the right timeframe for recovery? This will depend upon market changes, improvements, building codes, and the extent of compliance with those codes. The participants also discussed whether a quick recovery is really best. They observed that it can sometimes be unsafe for people if it is too fast. In particular, demolition work can cause safety issues.
Several of the engineers discussed the reliability and availability of the health care sector and their associated facilities to withstand damaging earthquakes and be available for response and long-term recovery. 
It was noted that the resiliency of people in the recent Chilean earthquake was quite remarkable and that it was due in part to the political climate, past history of damaging earthquakes within the area, and the type of government that exists within Chile. However, there are many valuable lessons that can be learned in the United States from that event and the mitigating measures that were implemented after the 1960 earthquake. 
Differing Responses throughout a Community. The participants discussed the importance of bridging the gaps between different segments of the community, such as between homeowners and renters and between the wealthy and the poor. They asked whether all members of the public will respond to the event in the same way. The response and resiliency of individual neighborhoods may differ, and a particular neighborhoods sense of community will affect its restoration. In addition, resilience tends to be better for those individuals who are well off; there is a corresponding decline in resilience among those with fewer resources. It was also noted that those who live alone may be more vulnerable, as they may lack the support of a social network. 
The group discussed what the publics first step should be after an earthquake. Individual action was again emphasized, as it was suggested that people should plan to check on their neighbors and help care for others.
Discussion of RWS Sectors and Components
In addition to emphasizing the importance of cultural resilience as a value, the participants observed some of the challenges associated with planning for resilience. For example, the social and economic structures of a place affect rebuilding after disasters. These structures change from community to community and so will make it difficult to anticipate the reaction to the event. Another issue is the scale at which we consider resilience: The state as a whole may be resilient, but certain towns may not be.
The participants thought that all the RWS sectors and components on the list are necessary for the resiliency of the housing and economic development sector. For example, the infrastructure that supports the supply chain must be resilient if businesses are to maintain access to suppliers and clients. As noted in the discussion of values, schools and daycare facilities are necessary if employees are to be available to work. The larger recovery of the economy is likewise dependent on these employees earning paychecks and spending their money on goods and services. The revival of the tourism industry is also dependent on the quick recovery of the other sectors and components. Many coastal communities depend on tourism, and this industry would be seriously impacted by an earthquake affecting Seattle. 
The participants thought that two additional components, communication and social services, should be added to the critical services sector. They also suggested that critical services should encompass both emergency response and recovery. 
Another observation was that the publics trust of the government can itself create a feeling of relief. In the example of Amsterdam, this trust in the government helped to create a culture of resilience. It was suggested that there is no such trust here in the state of Washington.
The group also suggested that all sectors should list the media as partners. 
Since earthquakes generate a lot of debris, it is critical to take stock of current debris management strategies and plans that exist within the state. A common goal and operating picture of this must be created and shared with various stakeholders to ensure all organizations are on the same page. 
In discussing issues relating to building standards, the participants observed that many new codes are based on the impacts of Hurricane Katrina, but this is not a good example for Washington. In addition, there is a cost associated with everything, including the codes. In making changes to the codes, it is necessary to consider the financial burden. The cost of the design will differ according to whether the intended performance level is life safety during the event or the ability to use the building to shelter in place after the event.  
The group went on to discuss the creation of high density in urban places. They discussed the relative merits (in terms of resilience) of tall condos versus short condos and of single family homes versus multi-family residences. In general, hazard/risk assessments tend to be better for newer and taller buildings. (It was observed, however that in some instances older buildings are safer.)
The participants also considered social standardsthat is, what is up to code for individual people. For example, a residential building might technically be safe, but people may still not want to live there because of their perceptions (e.g. things like broken plaster create the impression that the building is unfit).
Workgroup participants noted that the landscape affects resilience. Several cities and other groups are planning on islands or concentrated areas for response as compared to a dispersed population.
In contrast to high-density development, the group also looked at building urban areas outwards (sprawl). They concluded that this increases the hazardous areas. 
In their discussion of rebuilding, the participants again focused on the issue of cost: seismic requirements are often too expensive, and the machines and other non-structural features inside the buildings are also expensive. Decisions must be made with care, because they will have huge effects on some businesses. It was noted that just the thought of a threat is causing businesses to leave some areas. For this reason, mitigation is extremely important. Increased resilience can make the state more attractive to outside companies.
There must be a shift in the perception of builders and homeowners to ensure that people understand how their homes are capable of responding to earthquakes. Educating homeowners about their risk and what they can do to reduce it is part of effective mitigation. 
Further Discussion of Issues Relating to Housing and Economic Development 
Finances. Everyone is now more dependent on e-banking. Communication systems are needed to process ATM transactions and transactions made with debit/credit cards. Banks have mobile branches, but for this also communications are needed. 
The recovery of the housing sector is also dependent on the availability of disaster assistance (including loans), on insurance coverage and payments, and on the ability of people to return to work and earn paychecks.  
External Business Competition. If ports lose business during the recovery period, some of that business may not return later, because external competitors will have succeeded in luring it away. 
Communication. Working communications will be needed in order to assess what is going on. 
Law enforcement. Law enforcement needs to be included in the process. 
Transportation. Ports and rail are essential and key components of getting the economy back on track. For example, Boeing uses rail extensively in its operations, and an extended disruption in service would impact the company. 
How Can One Judge the States Ability to Restore the Housing and Economic Development Sector?
Financial Institutions. The capacity to restore functions will depend on the size of the event. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires banks and other entities that offer financial services to have back-up plans and to test them in terms of data transmission.
Private Businesses. Many businesses say they have back-up plans, but will they actually work?
Rural Areas vs. Urban Areas. The group noted that since most of the larger media organizations are located within Seattle and other metropolitan areas, their coverage may divert resources from smaller, rural areas. However, smaller rural areas may already be more resilient to earthquakes because of their community makeup. For example, some noted that eastern Washington may be more resilient than western Washington, because the former is more rural. 
The group discussed the ability to prepare and respond, not the capacity due to region or scale. 
Discussion of Where We Are TODAY
In general, the participants thought that the restoration of the financial sector (banking) would take weeks, although they again noted that this will depend on the type, intensity, and length of the earthquake. A Cascadia event would be crippling, but in other scenarios the sector would be more resilient.  
Also, they thought it would take the ports a long time to recover from a Cascadia earthquake, and they might never fully recover. One estimate was that it could take a minimum of three years to get back to work if the port goes down. In the meantime, more goods would have to be imported, and the region would experience a loss of jobs and manufacturing.  
Although they thought that I-5 would be all right, the participants suggested that some earthquake events would cause many bridges to fail, and they anticipated that the repairs would be expensive and time consuming. This would also mean an increase in travel time and a corresponding increase in the cost of delivering goods and services.
They noted that if peoples needs are not supplied during the recovery period, many people will leave.
Many in the group said they simply do not know the current capacity for recovery: Some components and some parts of the state will be resilient; some wont be. They indicated that this capacity depends to some extent on the stability of businesses prior to the disaster. They suggested that more research needs to be done to address the question of current capacity.
The participants suggested that construction will be resilient and will recover right away, but that real estate will take a long time to recover. They considered residential and commercial real estate as two different categories and estimated that the recovery of commercial real estate is likely to be quick, while that of residential is likely to be slow.
Construction of buildings is dependent on the recovery of other parts of the infrastructure, such as transportation. Damage to rail lines, for example, will negatively impact construction.  
The group anticipated that the manufacturing sector would take weeks-to-months to recover, and that the recovery of housing would be variable: In some cases, it might take only days, but in the case of multifamily housing, it could take weeks. The group anticipated that the needs of renters may be ignored, and higher-income renters may just choose to leave. Other issues related to housing included the following: 
 Several of the engineers noted that current building codes may not account for the duration of earthquake waves, such as long period waves from a subduction zone earthquake like the one that occurred in Chile. They noted that frames on buildings have changed and deal with earthquakes differently. 
 In terms of victims, it was identified that previous research discovered that during disasters, the most deaths tend to occur among elderly males who live alone.
Answers to Concluding Questions
What stood out most? 
 A high number of externalities influence the resilience of the housing and economic development sector. 
 It is necessary to develop a culture of resilience (recommended as the 6th RWS value). 
Is the sector better off or worse off than you anticipated?
 In regards to the Southern Whidbey Island Fault, many sectors may be worse than anticipated, because this is new information that was not previously considered by the building codes.
 The current building codes are not up to par.
 Things (maps) need to be updated.
Are we on the right track?
 People are not very prepared (rural vs. urban; business vs. rural; and population). By the same token, the sector is not totally under prepared: We have a base for now.




Concluding Session
Towards the end of the afternoon, the participants concluded the breakout sessions and reassembled in the main meeting area for the final session of the workshop. At the beginning of this session, the facilitator called on the spokesperson of each breakout group to present a summary of his/her groups discussions. 
Summary of Discussions (Breakout Groups)
Critical Services
The participants discussed the Resilient Washington State values and then examined the sectors and components. In the afternoon session, they did a more detailed walk through of the components of the critical services sector. 
The participants thought that emergency preparation and response might need to be expressed more explicitly in the values. They suggested including ecological restoration in the description of Environmental Protection, and perhaps addressing the concept of restoration in all the values. They discussed the psychological impact of a disaster on a community and suggested the need to look at community well-being when considering Life Safety and Human Health as well as Community Continuity. This led to the suggestion that the components of the critical services sector be adjusted: The participants wanted to replace hospital care with two new components: (1) health and medical care (this includes hospitals) and (2) social services.  
The participants looked at emergency response from a number of angles and identified key points that will affect the performance of most critical services following an earthquake:
 Performance of physical structures that house services (e.g. fire stations)
 Transportation access
 Utilities
 Staffing
They also discussed the need for in-state mutual aid agreements.
Hospitals in King County currently provide care to people from all over the state (and beyond). Because hospitals are at capacity now, we can expect them to be overloaded following a disaster. Washington can look to military resources for some assistance, but this may not be sufficient.
Concerning education, the participants noted that many schools will serve as temporary shelters, but that they will have to be returned to their primary function if the education of students is to be rapidly restored. (It was also noted that schools serve as sources of nutrition and oversight for many children.) Another challenge is the way that schools are funded: this funding system means schools are disposed to shut down rather than attempt to provide education in a partial or ad hoc way, as might be necessary following a disaster.   
Sheltering and mass feeding/care are fairly well defined as critical services. It will be necessary to look at the big picture to address resilience.
Particular points raised in connection with government administration included the need to educate elected officials concerning the issues of disaster preparation and response and the need to provide the public with information and a consistent message during the response.
The participants plan to continue the discussion by having participants input their ideas to a Sharepoint-type structure. They will then meet face-to-face to discuss the work and make revisions. Rebekah Green volunteered to set up the structure. 
Housing and Economic Development
The participants identified the following as the interdependencies and externalities:
 The neighborhood effect (knowing ones neighbor and developing emergency plans within neighborhoods)
 Capital markets
 Competition (If the ports are down, where will business go?)
 Communications (The participants discussed social networks and the way generation gaps impact modes of communication.)
 Transportation lines
 Building standards (in particular, the difference between standards aimed at life safety and standards that would go beyond this to permit people to shelter in place following an earthquake)
The participants also looked at the Resilient Washington State values, sectors, and components, with particular attention to:
 The quality of life necessary for continuing communities
 SchoolsA rapid recovery is necessary so parents are free to return to work and to help in the recovery across the community. 
 Tying values together with the idea of a culture of resiliency (trust).
 Critical servicesMilitary bases and national security should be added to the list of components.
 Recovery should also be added to the emergency response component
 Media should be added as one of the components of critical services.
The participants also discussed timeframes for returning to the new normal. They proposed the following general estimates:
 For finance/banking, days to months
 For retail, weeks in some cases, months to years in others
 For commercial real estate, months to years
 For manufacturing, weeks to months
The group concluded that the housing and economic development sector needs more people to contribute to subsequent discussions and work.
Transportation
Among their major findings, the group determined that the network is very interdependent and that this great complexity makes it hard to chart. 
The participants recognized that it is important to have a policy plan in placethe elected officials need it. They also advocated the be lazy approach: Make use of the work and the studies that have already been done or are currently underway. The effort should focus on rounding up such existing materials and distilling this information. This will not only draw in the assistance of those with expert knowledge, it will help to get buy-in from the agencies and organizations that sponsored or produced the studies. 
The participants observed that elected officials come and go, but that legislative staffers are often around for a long time. It would be a good idea to focus on educating them, because they can help provide some continuity.
In relation to economic continuity, the participants suggested pointing to the earthquake that struck Kobe, Japan. Talking to elected officials about the impacts of such a quake and stressing the issue of economic security may be a good way to persuade them.
The participants suggested adding ferries, locks, and pipelines to the list of components of the transportation sector. They also thought it was important to get the military involved. 
The participants discussed using new media/social media (Facebook and Twitter) as a way to reach the younger generation, but also thought face-to-face contact was essential. 
They discussed the need for an earthquake clearing house, as well as the need for an intensive, continuous marketing campaign to educate the public and teach preparedness. (It was suggested that this be approached in the way that Coca-Cola approaches advertising.) 
The participants discussed the need for a comprehensive plan and a science-based decision-making package. 
To continue with the work of the breakout session, the participants thought it was important to involve representatives from the Washington State Department of Transportation, particularly at the local level. 
Utilities
At the beginning of their discussion, the participants found it necessary to rank the values; they recommended this to the other sectors as a way to provide an overall guide to the larger discussion. For the utilities breakout group, the values were ranked from most important to least important as follows:
1. Life Safety and Human Health
2. Property Protection
3. Economic Security
4. Community Continuity
5. Environmental Protection
They also suggested that some attention should be given to preserving cultural resources, but had not decided whether this should be part of the values or incorporated into the list of sectors and components.
They suggested changing the name of the sector to utilities lifelines and revising the list of components for the sector so that:
 Drinking water is changed to domestic water supply.
 Drainage is added to wastewater.
 Fuel is qualified to include all forms of energy/fuel (e.g. liquid fuel, natural gas, renewables).
 Levies and flood control is added to the list. 
 Solid waste is added to the list.
They suggested adding food supply systems to the list of components under critical services. They also considered adding health care to hospital care and considering debris management as another component of critical services.
They considered transportation to be the most important externality for the utilities sector. They also suggested adding family concerns as an externality that affects the impact of and response to an earthquake. They thought it important to identify in advance the external resources that will be available to assist in response and recovery efforts (e.g. bulldozers from outside the affected area). 
The participants identified the following themes:
 We dont actually know the status of the infrastructurethis must be quantified.
 Interdependencies
 Time-frame questions
 Private vs. public sectora different approach may be needed for each
 Lack of common standards for things like pipelines
 Services vs. infrastructure
 Gap analysiswhat studies have and have not been done already
 Common infrastructure portal
 Identify top three vulnerabilities of each component
 Risk-based approach vs. consequences-based approach     
Summary of the Concluding Discussion (All Participants)
The discussion began with the observation that a lot of work related to resilience and earthquake preparedness has already been done, but that this work has not been identified and gathered together. Consequently, we have no clear picture of what has been done, what is currently underway, or who is doing it. Materials related to mitigation planning must be examined and pulled together, and this must be done at a high level to allow mitigation planning that prompts policy recommendations at the state level. Furthermore, because coordination across the state is needed, it is important to get away from the silos which have traditionally limited planning efforts. It was noted that studies that have been done end up sitting on a shelfnobody else knows about them. Studies must be used and plans actually implemented. 
It was also suggested that inquiries should be made to determine what it is that is impeding local jurisdictions from implementing mitigation strategies. That is, what at the local level is stopping them from getting to the next level? For example, if they did a study on X, what is it that is now stopping them from doing Y? Moreover, the work done as part of this initiative must consider and address the varied needs of different jurisdictions.  
A further suggestion was that the RWS subcommittee consider developing a partnership with the Pacific Northwest Economic Region (PNWER). It would be useful to know what PNWER has done so far on this.
It was observed that work on the RWS initiative will need to be comprehensive: It should include timelines (like the SPUR initiative) and costs. 
The initiative will also need champions in the state legislature and in the business community. To develop this, we should implement long-term education for political leaders so that the legislators will understand and champion the policies that come from this work. In addition, we should develop a legislative agenda: Draft the legislation in advance, so that when an event does occur, the political leadership already has this legislation in hand. It would also be a good idea to prepare op-ed pieces to back-up the legislation, and to have a strategy for publishing and promoting it.  
Another suggestion was to develop and implement an on-going public awareness campaign. This should be focused on making sure the public is ready (at the level of home and family). Such a campaign can be done on an all hazards basis. The importance of communications for situational awareness and recovery was also noted.
It was noted that it is important to use real examples of earthquakes and recovery efforts in other locations whose seismic and demographic profiles are similar to areas in Washington. By studying the resilience of areas that have experienced an earthquake disaster, it is possible to assess how other communities have succeeded or failed and to apply these lessons in Washington. For example, one can consider Kobe, Japan, in relation to Seattle, and Christchurch, New Zealand, in relation to many of Washingtons coastal communities.   
Another issue raised in the discussion was the need to deal with the concerns people will have for family and pets when a major earthquake occurs. Response and recovery will depend on the ability of human beings to respond, and this ability will be affected if people are worried about the safety of family members, pets, and so on. 
Among the challenges that will have to be addressed is the difficulty involved in accessing information about the capacity of various parts of the infrastructure. Some organizations are reluctant to share information or have reason to limit access to it. 
It was suggested that more people should be brought into the discussion to ensure that all sectors are adequately represented. Additional expertise is needed to address all points and questions. One form of expertise that was mentioned was urban planning: Urban planners can help determine what we will need to respond effectively to an earthquake.
Some participants emphasized the importance of focusing on the 50-year time frame. They suggested that we need to move away from making do with what we have now to working on implementing changes over the next fifty years. Another participant reiterated the idea that to achieve resilience, we must prioritize the long termin other words, resilience means that mitigation and long-term economic viability are the highest priorities, not life safety.  
Yet another suggestion was to focus on ITC. 
It was noted that implementation involves economic considerations and should be broken down into phases: the near term, medium term, and long term. The near term is constrained by todays budget situation, but the medium term and the long term are not. 
Some participants stressed the need for statewide agreements to share servicesthat is, there is a need for legislation that will enable mutual aid across jurisdictions. To develop such agreements, it will be necessary to address all the complications that are currently involved in providing this type of mutual aid.
It was also suggested that a command structure be set up so that it is clear who the decision maker is for the response effort. Existing legislation concerning emergency management and continuity should also be examined (e.g. 3185, WAC 118). 



Appendix C: Presentations
The following presentations were given at the beginning of the workshop in order to orient the participants and provide essential background information.
1. Overview of Washington State Seismic Safety Committee, presented by John Schelling
2. Earthquake Threats to Resiliency Hazards in Washington, presented by Tim Walsh 
3. Resilient Washington State Initiative, presented by Stacy Bartoletti
4. Determining Washingtons ResilienceSectors & Components, presented by Scott Miles




Introduction
The Workshop on December 2
The final Resilient Washington State Workshop was held on December 2, 2011. This one-day event allowed participants to review and contribute additional information to the assessments that the four sector groups (Critical Services, Utilities, Transportation, and Housing and Economic Development) had developed during the preceding year. The workshop was intended to wrap up the work of the sector groups by giving participants the chance to:	
 Compare the estimated and desired recovery timeframes that each group proposed.
 Discuss conflicts in the results and the interdependencies of the sectors.
 Revise estimated recovery times and any notes that explained or qualified the estimates.
 Propose and discuss recommendations for achieving recommended resiliency targets.
The results of the workshop will be used by the Resilient Washington State (RWS) Sub-committee to develop the state Seismic Safety Committees final report and, ultimately, policy recommendations for agency and legislative action.
Purpose and Background of the Resilient Washington State Initiative 
As research over the past several decades has shown, the earthquake hazard in our state is very high. A recent FEMA study of estimated losses from earthquakes now ranks the state of Washington second in the nation for highest earthquake risk (FEMA 366/April 2008). Moreover, because all regions of the state are interconnectedeconomically, socially, and even physically through shared systems and resourcesa destructive earthquake in one part of the state can have serious and long-lasting consequences for the others. 
To address this hazard, the Washington State Seismic Safety Committee initiated the Resilient Washington State Initiative. Its purpose is to provide a framework for improving Washingtons resilience when earthquakes occur by proactively reducing critical vulnerabilities before the next damaging incident. Such a framework includes recommendations for legislation and other measures that will encourage pre-earthquake planning, mitigation, and enhanced seismic performance of future construction to lower seismic risk and reduce the time it takes to recover from a significant earthquake. The framework is intended to facilitate long-term implementation of seismic risk reduction policies and activities across the state with the goal of making the state resilient in a 50-year timeframe. 
 Resilience Defined
To shape the initial direction of the project, the Resilient Washington State (RWS) Sub-committee surveyed the existing literature and found numerous definitions of the term resiliencenone of which were suitable for this initiative. Ultimately, the RWS Subcommittee formulated a definition of resilience that can be applied to the state as a whole: 
A resilient state is one that maintains services and livelihoods after an earth-quake. In the event that services and livelihoods are disrupted, recovery occurs rapidly, with minimal social disruption, and results in a new and better condition. 
The subcommittee also articulated a set of equally-weighted values to help guide participants as they identified potential recovery targets. These are (in no particular order): 
 Life Safety and Human Health: Residents of the State of Washington should not suffer life-threatening injuries from earthquake-induced damage or develop serious illness from lack of emergency medical care after an earthquake. This includes enforcing and updating building codes, eliminating non-structural hazards, and ensuring continuity of emergency health care.
 Property Protection: Public and private property within the State of Washington should be built, retrofitted, or rebuilt to minimize earthquake-induced damage. This includes proper design and construction of both structural and non-structural elements.
 Economic Security: Residents and businesses within the State of Washington should have access to income opportunities to meet basic needs before and soon after an earthquake. This includes sufficient employment opportunities, market access, distribution capacity, and supplier access.
 Environmental Quality: The natural resources and ecosystems of Washington State should be managed in such a way as to minimize earthquake-induced damage. This includes the use of proper growth management, accident response capacity, and industrial safety measures. 
 Community Continuity: All communities within the State of Washington should have the capacity to maintain their social networks and livelihoods after an earthquake disaster. This includes prevention of social-network disruption, social discrimination, and community bias.
 Defining the "Expected" Earthquake(s) for this Project
For the purposes of defining resilience and developing mitigation policies to achieve it, the RWS Subcommittee directed that sector group participants adopt a two-pronged approach to the expected earthquake ground motions. The first approach was to consider a series of scenario earthquakes that had been defined for the State of Washington in 2009. Participants were to use these scenarios to comprehend the geographic area of impact of a single earthquake, with the understanding that only a single scenario happens at one time. These expected-earthquake scenarios are consistent with the USGS National Seismic Hazard Maps, even though they represent a single event and some may occur more frequently than others. The second approach was to consider peak ground accelerations (PGA)defined by the USGS as having a 10% probability of exceedance (10/50)for the state. These are shown on the following map:



Assessing the Resilience of Washingtons Infrastructure
For organizational purposes, the states systems and infrastructure were divided into four key sectors: Critical Services, Transportation, Utilities, and Housing and Economic Development. These sectors were further subdivided into their primary components. This organization provided the basic structure for all discussions about and assessments of Washingtons capacity to recover from an earthquake.
To ensure a full and balanced assessment, the RWS Subcommittee solicited input from a wide range of experts and stakeholders from across the state and from all four sectors. The participants in this project included representatives from local, state, and federal agencies, university departments, and private businesses.    
The subcommittee began gathering input at a one-day kick-off workshop on September 17, 2010. Forty-five people attended and participated in discussions that further refined the values and shaped the way the sectors and components were defined. 
Following this initial workshop, four workgroups were formed, one for each of the sectors. These groups, which included many of the people who had attended the workshop, met from spring through fall of 2011. The members of the sector groups used their collective expertise to: 
 Evaluate the current condition of the states systems and infrastructure to determine how they will hold up in an earthquake and how quickly they can be restored if disrupted or damaged.
 Define the desired levels of performance and develop target timeframes for the restoration of services and functions following an earthquake.
 Define the vulnerabilities and key interdependencies of each sector. (For example, when considered alone, the food network might be restored within a week to a month, but its recovery depends on the restoration of the transportation system, which could take longer than three months.)
 Propose recommendations for statewide action to achieve desired targets. 
 The Role of the Final Workshop on December 2, 2011
At the concluding Resilient Washington State Workshop on December 2, 2011, the co-chairs of the sector groups presented the results of each groups efforts. The experts and stakeholders who participated in the final workshop were then invited to take part in breakout sessions to review and, if necessary, revise the assessments. In particular, the participants were asked to capture the ways in which the interdependencies of the sectors and components might impact and alter the timeframes required for recovery. 
The results of the workgroups and the modifications made during the workshop on December 2, 2011 are summarized in the tables and notes in the following report. The tables and notes are intended to serve as tools for shaping the direction of earthquake planning, mitigation, and response and the development of policies that will improve statewide resilience. 

Critical Services Sector
The following table provides a summary of the estimated timeframes for recovery of key components of the infrastructure, systems, and services of the Critical Services sector in the state of Washington. The Xs indicate the sector groups best educated guess regarding the current timeframe for the response and recovery of each component and subcomponent after a scenario earthquake. The colored areas represent the goals or targets for each component and subcomponent. (These targets indicate the recovery timeframes that are necessary to achieve resilience in the state of Washington.) The gaps between the Xs and the colored areas reveal the need for further evaluation, policies, and actions to improve Washingtons resilience.
KEY TO THE TABLE
TARGET TIMEFRAME FOR RECOVERY:

Operational* (time it ought to take to restore component to 80-90% operational):

TIME NEEDED FOR RECOVERY TO 80-90% OPERATIONAL GIVEN CURRENT CONDITIONS:

For a number of components, the timeframes marked in the table reflect the estimated recovery period following a worst case scenario earthquake. See the notes following the table for details.


TARGET STATES OF RECOVERY: WASHINGTONS CRITICAL SERVICES SECTOR  

Event occurs
024 hours
13 days
37 days
1 week    1 month
1 month  3 months
3 months    1 year
1 year 3 years
3 + years
Law enforcement

          







Emergency response

          







Health and medical care

          







Education

          







Mass care 

          







Social services

          







Food network

          







Government administration











Law Enforcement
Law enforcement in this context refers to the emergency response and regular policing duties of local and state law enforcement agencies. 
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 37 days
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 37 days
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 Effective response depends on whether or not the communications system is functioning following the earthquake. (This may depend in part on the functionality of backup generators.) 
 The number of law enforcement personnel who are able to report to work may be limited by such factors as the state of the transportation system and where personnel were at the time of the earthquake.
 The availability of vehicles and fuel may be limited due to earthquake damage.
 Law enforcement facilities (including prisons) and equipment may be damaged by the earthquake or secondary effects.
 Transportation corridors (such as roads and bridges) in damaged areas will have to be repaired. It will also take time to identify and clear alternate routes.
 The response and recovery timeframe is likely to be shorter if agencies maintain up-to-date pre-disaster plans and have trained personnel to implement them.
 Mutual aid agreements between counties may facilitate a quicker response and shorten the recovery timeframe.
 The communitys level of trust in law enforcement prior to the earthquake is likely to influence the effectiveness of law enforcement after the event. Likewise, the increased stress and feelings of vulnerability that develop in a population within the first few days of a disaster will impact peoples perceptions of law enforcement. 
A recovery period of 37 days was considered realistic for this component due to the amount of time required to gather agency personnel, clear critical transportation routes, and resolve problems resulting from damage to law enforcement facilities and equipment. 
After an earthquake, the first priority of law enforcement personnel will be life saving and live sustaining actions, rather than regular policing. This means that emergency-specific law enforcement activities will constitute the first stage of the recovery of this component, with law enforcement officers working alongside other emergency responders. Because the earthquake scenarios being considered are serious enough to prompt a presidential disaster declaration, it is likely that the National Guard will be mobilized to assist with security. Regular policing duties will be resumed as the recovery proceeds. It may be some time, however, before the communitys feeling of pre-earthquake security is restored.   
 Recommendations
 Identify, review, and update the disaster response plans of law enforcement agencies. As part of this process, make sure that law enforcement personnel are familiar with and trained to implement these plans. Reassess disaster response plans annually.  
 Identify, review, and encourage further development and expansion of mutual aid agreements to help facilitate the sharing of resources and personnel. Reassess these agreements annually. Also, take steps to increase awareness of existing mutual aid agreements (local, county, state, and federal).
National Security
The response and recovery of facilities and services related to national security were not specifically included in the estimated recovery period for local and state law enforcement. 
Issues related to national security include:
 Safety and continuity of operations at military bases such as Joint Base Lewis-McChord and the U.S. Naval Submarine Base at Bangor. Among other things, this will depend on whether buildings are constructed or retrofitted to withstand expected earthquakes.
 The development of redundancy in key systems and functions of Washingtons military bases to ensure minimal disruption of national systems.
 Border security, particularly in the days immediately following an earthquake that disrupts normal security operations along the Canadian border or that reduces Coastguard patrols along Washingtons coast.  
 The ability of the Hanford nuclear-power plant and reservation to withstand the effects of an earthquake and remain both safe and secure.  
While the resilience and recovery of such facilities and services are matters of concern, these must be addressed at a national level, with input from relevant agencies and authorities, including the Department of Defense and U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
Emergency Response
Emergency response in this context refers to all first responders, including urban search-and-rescue teams, fire fighters, and emergency medical technicians (EMTs). This component also includes emergency operations centers (EOCs) and critical response systems, non-profit aid organizations (such as the American Red Cross), emergency morgue facilities, and Hazmat crews.  
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 13 days
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 37 days
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 The more extensive the damage and the greater the number of fires that result from the earthquake, the greater the demand will be on limited resources and personnel. 
 Some fire stations and other emergency response facilities and equipment may be rendered inoperable by the earthquake or secondary effects. 
 If local water systems are damaged, water may not be available for firefighting.
 The number of local emergency response personnel who are able to report to work may be limited by such factors as the state of the transportation system and where personnel were at the time of the earthquake.
 Mutual aid agreements between counties may facilitate a quicker response and shorten the recovery timeframe.
 It will take time to manage debris, restore transportation corridors (such as roads and bridges), and identify alternate routes. How much time is needed will depend on factors such as geographic location and the extent of the damage.
 Qualified building inspectors must be available to certify that buildings are safe to use. 
Although many aspects of emergency response will be initiated within the first 24 hours, a period of 13 days is realistic given the length of time needed to:
 Staff state and local emergency operations centers.
 Mobilize urban search-and-rescue teams and transport them into the disaster area.
 Coordinate with military bases to establish alternate means of transporting personnel, equipment, and pharmaceutical supplies from outside the disaster area.
 Find headquarters for aid organizations such as the American Red Cross.
In rural areas and small cities, emergency response may take longer than in the larger urban areas because the resources of rural areas tend to be more limited. Rural counties and small cities will be particularly reliant on pre-existing mutual aid agreements with other communities across the state. 
 Recommendations
 Identify, review, and encourage further development and expansion of mutual aid agreements to help facilitate the sharing of resources and personnel. Reassess these agreements annually. Also, take steps to increase awareness of existing mutual aid agreements (local, county, state, and federal).
 Seismically retrofit all fires stations located in vulnerable areas. 
 All jurisdictions, regardless of size, should develop, exercise, and update annually robust continuity of operations plans, including the ordering and deployment of requested resources such as field hospitals and other life saving priorities. 
 All water-side communities should look into the use of boats for fire suppression and should plan for this contingency where other sources of water for fire suppression may not be available following an earthquake.
Health and Medical Care
Health and medical care refers to the normal servicesincluding elective proceduresprovided by Washingtons hospitals, medical clinics, and other health care facilities. (Emergency care, which will be initiated immediately following an earthquake, is addressed above as part of the emergency response component.)
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 1 weekmonth
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 3 months year
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 A number of hospitals and medical facilities may be damaged by the earthquake or secondary effects. The extent of the damage will in turn depend on factors such as the location of the facility, the seismic standards to which the facility was designed, and (in the case of older structures) whether the facility has been retrofitted.
 It will take time to restore the utilitiesparticularly water, wastewater, and electricityon which medical facilities depend.
 The greater the number of people injured as a result of the earthquake, the greater will be the demand for staffed beds at undamaged hospitals and alternate care facilities. Currently, hospitals function at capacity, with few staffed beds available.)
 Patients at damaged hospitals may have to be evacuated and relocated to facilities in other cities and states.
 The extent to which the supply chain of hospitals and medical facilities is disrupted will vary, as will the amount of time it takes to re-establish sources and modes of delivery. 
As a temporary aid to recovery, federally provided temporary medical facilities and assets can be brought into damaged areas to provide essential services while regular facilities are repaired or rebuilt. 
This component can be said to have recovered when regular services have been restored and medical buildings are reoccupied up to 80 percent of the states pre-disaster capacity (although some temporary solutions may still be in place in particular areas). 
 Recommendations
 Retrofit the existing buildings of hospitals and medical facilities so that they are able not only to withstand an earthquake, but to remain in use afterwards. Construct new buildings to meet this standard.
 Require hospitals to implement non-structural retrofits where this has not already been done.
 Retrofit and upgrade the parts of the utilities infrastructure on which hospitals depend to meet an operational level of performance, or require redundant systems to be in place for as long as needed until utility infrastructure is operational.
 Because hospitals and medical facilities rely on just-in-time delivery of pharmaceuticals and other supplies, their supply chains should be evaluated and upgraded to remain operational following an earthquake; alternatively, redundant supply chains should be established.
 Continue to push for improved credentialing (for example, quickly credential doctors to work in Washington). 
Education
Education in this context refers to Washingtons public and private school systems (kindergarten through grade 12). 
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 1 weekmonth
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 3 months year
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 A number of school buildings may be damaged by the earthquake or secondary effects. The extent of the damage will in turn depend on factors such as the location of the buildings, the seismic standards to which the buildings were designed, and (in the case of older structures) whether the buildings have been retrofitted.
 Many school buildings will serve as designated shelters following the earthquake. How long it takes to restore them to their original purpose will depend on how long they are needed as shelters.
 The feasibility of transporting students to alternate facilities or neighboring schools will depend on factors such as the state of the transportation system and the availability of buses and fuel.
To better define the recovery period of education, this component can be divided into three subcomponents:
 The physical facilities. Some school buildings are older than others and not all have been retrofitted to minimize earthquake damage. Those that sustain damage will have to be repaired or, in some cases, entirely rebuilt. The estimated timeframe for physical facilities is therefore 13 years.
 The curriculum. Because alternate facilities can be used until buildings are repaired or replaced, the learning that takes place within the schools may be restored sooner than the school buildings themselves. To replace supplies, be able to track educational progress, develop alternative learning strategies, and restore the full curriculum and after-school activities is expected to take 3 months year.  
 The social aspects. Schools serve a variety of social functions and provide many services to children, including mental health services and meals. Children also benefit mentally if their sense of normalcy is restored swiftly after a disaster: A regular school schedule helps provide this and allows parents to return to work. The restoration of these social aspects of education is possible within 1 month.   
 Recommendations
 Extend the recently completed Washington State School Seismic Safety Pilot Project to the entire state to assess the seismic risk of school facilities across the state and determine which buildings are priorities for retrofitting and replacement. Complete retrofits or replacements of all vulnerable schools to achieve the desired performance objective.
 Further encourage school districts to develop pre-disaster mitigation plans through the state  in order to qualify for FEMA funding (including structural and non-structural retrofits of school buildings).
 Examine the current process by which districts apply to OSPI for state funds for building and repair following a disaster and, to ensure a swift recovery, develop a mechanism for speeding up this process.
 Encourage schools and districts to explore alternative strategies for providing social and educational components of education. Encourage schools and districts to begin formalizing a suite of alternative education strategies, such as facility-sharing, for a post-disaster environment.
Mass Care
Mass care is part of the emergency response following a disaster and involves the distribution of emergency supplies and resources (clothing, shelter, food, and water) to those in need. Some providers of mass care also seek to reconnect people to whatever social services they used before the disaster. Providers may include both nonprofit organizations, such as the Red Cross, and governmental agencies.
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 37 days for a major Cascadia subduction zone event with widespread damage; 13 days for a more localized event
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 1 week month
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors, including: 
 The extent of the damage and the size of the area into which supplies and mobile facilities must be brought.
 The state of the transportation infrastructure and the availability of alternate routes in highly damaged areas.
 The impact of the earthquake on the housing stock and the number of people who must evacuate damaged homes and live in temporary shelters.
 Recommendations
 Educate the public to prepare to be self-sufficient for at least three days following a disaster. Such preparations should include stocking a supply of food, water, and essential medications. Those who live in areas that are likely to be heavily impacted by a Cascadia subduction zone event or an earthquake on the Seattle fault should be encouraged to prepare supplies for a minimum of seven days. 
 Future construction should be designed for usability, rather than just life-safety. Usability means that the structure can be used (inhabited) after an earthquake. This will allow a majority of the population to shelter-in-place and be self-sufficient for several days following the earthquake. In addition to facilitating a quicker recovery, this investment in the housing stock will serve the economic interests of the community and the state by reducing the likelihood that people will move elsewhere after the event.
Social Services  
In Washington, the Department of Social and Health Services (DSHS) oversees the states social services, including regular assistance with food, mental and physical health care, childcare, and treatment for addictions, as well as help for victims of physical abuse. Due to budget cuts, the people of Washington must rely increasingly on non-profit aid organizations for delivery of such services. A large-scale earthquake is likely to result in substantial temporary degradation of the level of service. 
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 1 weekmonth
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 1 month3 months
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors, including: 
 The seismic vulnerability of buildings that house DSHS and social service providers and the extent to which these buildings are damaged by the earthquake or secondary effects.
 Whether social service providers have well developed continuity of operations plans.
 The ability of DSHS and social service providers to mobilize staff and access essential communications and information technologies (IT). 
 Recommendations
 Identify, review, and update the emergency response and continuity of operations plans of DSHS and all non-profit social service providers. These plans should take into account the network on which the providers depend and should be reassessed annually. 
 DSHS provides a 2-1-1 referral service (accessible by phone), which promotes some planning with partner organizations. Planning with partner organizations on a regional basis should be promoted. Regional networks that include the smaller jurisdictions should also be further developed.
 Develop a database that helps emergency responders identify and locate non-profit social service providers. 
Food Network
Food network refers to the normal system by which food is stored, distributed, and sold to consumers. This network is operated by the private sector and includes nationally, regionally, and locally owned grocery stores as well as warehouses.
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 1 week month
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 1 week month
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors, including: 
 The state of the transportation infrastructure (roads, bridges, rail lines, ferries, ports, and airports) by means of which the network distributes food, and the length of time it takes to make repairs or identify efficient alternate routes.
 The length of time it takes to restore essential utilities (electricity and water) to grocery stores and warehouses.
 The extent of structural and nonstructural damage to stores and warehouses.
The recovery of the food network is defined by its ability to deliver a relatively normal food supply at costs that are also close to normal. Because the state of Alaska is dependent on Washington for its food supply, the recovery of Washingtons food network will also be of great concern to Alaska and will have economic consequences for both states.
Two of the food networks chief vulnerabilities are its dependence on the transportation system and the location of its distribution centers. Most of the latter are in the Kent Valley in King County. This valley is prone to liquefaction, so warehouses there may sustain significant damage during an earthquake. The estimates in the table assume a relatively swift recovery of the transportation system, allowing food, workers, and consumers to reach stores.  
National grocery chains, by virtue of their size, may be better positioned to recover from a damaging earthquake than many local and regional businesses. 
 Recommendations
 Educate the public to prepare to be self-sufficient for at least three days following a disaster. Such preparations should include stocking a supply of food, water, and essential medications. Those who live in areas that are likely to be heavily impacted by a Cascadia subduction zone event or an earthquake on the Seattle fault should be encouraged to prepare supplies for a minimum of seven days. 
 Gather additional input from the owners and managers of grocery stores and food distribution centers regarding the levels of redundancy in their supply chain systems.
 Where sufficient redundancy does not exist, require that food distribution systems be designed or upgraded to higher standards to achieve performance objectives.
 Best practices in food supply chain management from recent incidents in Japan, Chile, and New Zealand should be incorporated into local, state, and federal response plans. 
Government Administration
Government administration refers to elected officials and staff at the local and state levels and includes both emergency operations and regular administrative functions. This component has multiple parts or aspects, including representation, finance, policy development, executive decision making, and services (such as the issuing of licenses and permits). 
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 37 days
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 1 week month
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 The extent of damage to the facilities that house the operations of government will depend on factors such as the location of the buildings, the seismic standards to which the buildings were designed, and (in the case of older structures) whether the buildings have been retrofitted. The length of time it takes to repair or replace damaged buildings will vary accordingly.
 The response and recovery will be quicker if back-up facilities already exist and are undamaged.
 Temporary facilities must be found to house key personnel and functions while repairs are being made. 
 Effective response and recovery both depend on the performance of communications systems, including both the cell network and emergency backup systems (satellite phones and ham radios).
 The effectiveness of each agencys emergency plan influences the overall recovery of this component. Likewise, the development prior to an earthquake of a Continuity of Government (COG) Plan, including the ability to locate elected officials after the event, will facilitate a quicker response and recovery.  
Particular aspects of government, notably decision making, finance, and information technology (IT), are generally expected to be restored within 37 days. Many of these functions can be carried out in temporary facilities and can be restored before physical structures are repaired. It is particularly important that financial functions be restored in less than a week. Building and planning departments should also be functioning within a week of the event, provided staff can access the facility. Other non-essential functions of government can take up to a month to recover without detrimentally affecting the states resilience. 
While some functions, such as decision making, can easily be carried out in temporary facilities, others, such as the issuing of permits and licenses, are more dependent on particular facilities, information systems, and equipment. If these are seriously damaged, then the current recovery timeframe may be as long as 3 months year. 
The state government in Olympia has backup facilities in Spokane. Most local governments, however, are unlikely to have robust backups, generally because their backups tend to be located within the same general region. In a significant earthquake, the backup facilities may experience as much damage as the primary facilities.
 Recommendations
 Government administrators of all jurisdictions should identify which facets of their operations are critical and should have plans to provide continuity of service for these areas. Continuity of Operations (COOP) plans should identify areas that are unlikely to be in the main impact zones of an earthquake (or tsunami). 
 Identify, review, and update annually the continuity of operations plans of all jurisdictions (both large and small) to ensure that these plans are robust and that personnel are trained to implement them. 
 At all three levels of government (local, state, and federal), encourage a stronger emphasis on recovery planning in addition to response.
General Recommendations
 Further investigate and define the risk associated with loss of power, water, and wastewater to critical service providers. Our anticipated timeframes for recovery have assumed that widespread outages of these utilities will not extend beyond a few days, while much more localized loss could happen for longer time periods.
 As part of pre-disaster planning, consider the impacts of the potential loss of utilities at critical facilities (e.g. hospitals) and develop strategies to provide redundant systems locally.
 Given the tsunami hazard along Washingtons coast, new public (critical services) structures that are built in the inundation zone should be designed to serve as vertical evacuation shelters. To facilitate this, the new Appendix M of the 2012 International Building Code (IBC) should be adopted at the state level. This would restrict construction of high occupancy, high risk, or critical facilities within the tsunami inundation zone unless these structures are designed and built as vertical evacuation refuges.
 Require those who are engaging in response and recovery planning to take into account where their critical service providers live relative to where they serve, as well as how concerns about the safety of their family members may affect the availability of critical service providers. 

Utilities Sector
The following table provides a summary of the estimated timeframes for recovery of key components of the infrastructure, systems, and services of the Utilities sector in the state of Washington. The letters (L, NL, and X) indicate the sector groups best educated guess regarding the current timeframe for the response and recovery of each component and subcomponent after a scenario earthquake. The colored areas represent the goals or targets for each component and subcomponent. (These targets indicate the recovery timeframes that are necessary to achieve resilience in the state of Washington.) The gaps between the letters and the colored areas reveal the need for further evaluation, policies, and actions to improve Washingtons resilience.
The estimates proposed in the table reflect the recovery potential of the existing, permanent utilities systems. Because of the variable nature of earthquake damage and the way these systems function, restoration of service will depend on the end users geographical location. 
Although temporary solutions can be implemented in some cases, restoring service to end-users depends on restoration of the system as a whole and so will not occur incrementally. Also, the estimates do not include the time involved in restoring the final points of connection between the utilities systems and individual houses and facilities. 
KEY TO THE TABLE
TARGET TIMEFRAME FOR RECOVERY:

Operational (time it ought to take to restore component to 80-90% operational):

TIME NEEDED FOR RECOVERY TO 80-90% OPERATIONAL GIVEN CURRENT CONDITIONS:

TIME NEEDED FOR RECOVERY TO 80-90% OPERATIONAL IN LIQUEFACTION ZONES GIVEN CURRENT CONDITIONS:
L
TIME NEEDED FOR RECOVERY TO 80-90% OPERATIONAL IN NON-LIQUEFACTION ZONES GIVEN CURRENT CONDITIONS:
NL




TARGET STATES OF RECOVERY: WASHINGTONS UTILITIES SECTOR  

Event occurs
024 hours
13 days
37 days
1 week    1 month
1 month  3 months
3 months    1 year
1 year 3 years
3 + years
Domestic water supply









    Supply & transmission pipes    



NL


L


    Distribution pipes




NL

L


Wastewater systems









    Treatment facilities





NL
L


    Sewer pipes





NL

L

Flood control









    Dams









    Levees









Electricity









    Transmission









    Distribution, 60% restored









    Distribution, 70% restored









    Distribution, greater than 70%
    restored









Natural Gas 









    Transmission


NL

L




    Distribution, 40% restored









    Distribution, 90% restored









Petroleum









    Refineries & transmission









    Distribution









Information and communication technology










Event occurs
024 hours
13 days
37 days
1 week    1 month
1 month  3 months
3 months    1 year
1 year 3 years
3 + years

Domestic Water Supply
This component consists of reservoirs, storage facilities, treatment facilities, pump stations, transmission pipelines, and distribution pipelines for household, business, and emergency services use. It does not include pipelines and hookups on customers private property: these must be repaired by the property owner. Nevertheless, private residences and facilities will likely require inspection before service can be restored.
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Supply & transmission pipes: 13 days 
 Distribution pipes: 13 days 
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 
 Supply & transmission pipes: 37 days in zones of no liquefaction; 3 months year in liquefaction zones
 Distribution pipes: 1 weekmonth in zones of no liquefaction; 3 months year in liquefaction zones 
The actual restoration and recovery times of domestic water service will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 Damage will be more severe and require more extensive repair if the fault rupture is coincident with a pipeline, such as the Cedar River pipelines and the Eastside supply line in Bellevue.
 A significant amount of time will be needed to repair components located in liquefaction zones (such as the Kent Valley) or areas subject to other ground failure unless these components are pile-supported.
 Factors such as fault proximity, topography, and soil type are likely to increase the level of ground motion and the time required to repair the systems damaged components. 
 The extent of damage and the time required to repair above-ground structures will be reduced if the structures have been appropriately designed. Older structures that have not been upgraded are likely to suffer greater damage.
 Equipment (such as backup power systems) inside pump stations and control centers is more likely to be damaged if it is not properly anchored. This will increase the time needed to restore service.
 Damage to major transmission lines or to large (20" and larger) distribution mains will likely result in de-watering of large portions of the water system. This could include the draining of reservoirs, tanks, and standpipes. De-watering will increase the time required to make repairs. 
 If a system is in a tsunami zone, wells are likely to be contaminated and components of the system may be undermined by erosion. 
 Systems that have redundant suppliessuch as the City of Seattles systemare likely to experience either shorter periods without service or no loss of service.
 If customers hookups are damaged, service cannot be restored until the hookups are repaired. Turning the service back on at the hookup will likely require inspection by trained personnel, of whom there is a limited number.
 Initial response by water utilities companies to earthquake damage will focus on isolating main leaks and breaks in order to prevent further damage or disruption of water service to other areas. The time required for repairs will depend on the number of leaks and breaks, as well as the speed with which leaks and breaks can be accessed and identified.
 The time required to restore service to a particular area will be affected by decisions about the priorities and schedule for restoration of one affected area over another. For example, the flow of water for fire suppression can only be restored after repairs are made and water service resumed in the particular area. 
 Water supply lines must be disinfected prior to restoration of full service. This will increase the restoration time.
 Temporary measures can be taken to restore service quickly while permanent repairs are being made. These measures include temporarily bypassing damaged pipe sections or using temporary water supplies, such as trucked or bottled water.
 The speed with which repairs are made is limited by the availability of repair crews. Such personnel often require credentials, so their numbers cannot be quickly augmented after an earthquake.
 Repair crews, including private contractors, must be able to use roads and bridges. Debris will have to be cleared before they can access damaged facilities. Repairs will be delayed if crews are not given access at the same time as emergency response vehicles. Because private contractors may not be easy to identify as contractors of the utility company, they may not be granted access.
 Mutual aid for augmenting repair crews is unlikely to be available in a large Cascadia subduction zone event because of the expected widespread damage.
 The availability for delivery of the parts and equipment needed to repair and replace damaged sections of the system will affect the time required to make repairs. Most utilities do not maintain large inventories of pipes, fittings, and other parts.
 The time period within which temporary service measures and repairs can be made will depend on the status of communications systems and whether there are functional backup communication systems.
 On-site backup power will likely be needed at control centers, treatment plants, and pump stations to ensure that these facilities continue to function. Some pump stations do not have generators and instead are connected to two different electrical substations for redundancy. Pump stations are not required for gravity-fed systems. 
 Depending on the amount of fuel located at the facility and whether additional fuel can be delivered, the facility may lose backup power before the primary power is restored.
 If on-site backup power is not available, mobile generators may be delivered. This will require access to roadways and bridges. The lack of external quick hookups for connecting mobile generators may increase the service restoration time.
 The target timeframe for the restoration of water service is necessary primarily for fire suppression.
In general, systems and facilities that are located in and on competent soils, such as on the plateaus around Everett, Seattle, and Tacoma, are likely to sustain less damage during an earthquake and may be restored within a matter of days. Systems located in areas where soils are prone to liquefaction are likely to experience significant damage and will therefore take longer to restore. Only the most vulnerable structures will be damaged in the foothills of the Cascades. For the most part in Puget Sound, the domestic water supply is gravity fed and does not need electricity to flow.
 Recommendations
 Require that utilities have backup generators at treatment plants as well as at pump stations. Do not allow the use of the connection of stations to two different electrical substations to satisfy the requirement.
 Regulate anchorage of equipment.
 Require all water utilities to assess the earthquake risk of their systems, including expected outage time, damage due to fire following the earthquake, and economic damage to the utility and the community. Develop a plan to improve the system to meet the desired level of service, estimate the cost of improvement, and assess the cost of the improvements compared to expected losses. This should be done as part of the water system comprehensive planning process and updated on a regular basis.
 Require all new pipelines to be designed to be operational following the design earthquake.
 Replace all highly vulnerable water mains that are located in liquefiable and other unstable soils. Replace them with pipeline systems that are resistant to permanent ground deformation.
 See general recommendations.
Wastewater Systems
This component consists of sewer and stormwater systems, including wastewater pump stations, transmission and distribution pipelines, catch basins, and wastewater treatment facilities. It does not include pipelines and hookups on customers private property: these must be repaired by the property owner. Nevertheless, private residences and facilities will likely require inspection before service can be restored.
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Treatment facilities: 1 week month
 Sewer pipes: 1 weekmonth  
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 
 Treatment facilities: 1month3 months in zones of no liquefaction; 3 months year in liquefaction zones
 Sewer pipes: 1 month3 months in zones of no liquefaction; 1 year3 years in liquefaction zones 
The actual restoration and recovery times of wastewater services will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 Damage will be more severe and require more extensive repair if the fault rupture is coincident with a pipeline.
 A significant amount of time will be needed to repair components located in liquefaction zones (such as the Kent Valley) or areas subject to other ground failure. Any settlement of sewage pipes will prevent flow in gravity flow systems. Pile-supported facilities are less likely to suffer significant damage.
 Factors such as fault proximity, topography, and soil type are likely to increase the level of ground motion and the time required to repair damaged components. 
 The extent of damage and time required to repair above-ground structures will be reduced if the structures have been appropriately designed. Older structures that have not been upgraded are likely to suffer greater damage.
 The equipment (such as backup power systems) inside pump stations and control centers is more likely to be damaged if it is not properly anchored. This will increase the time needed to restore service.
 The time required to make repairs will depend on the number of leaks and breaks, as well as the speed with which leaks and breaks can be accessed and identified.
 The extent to which debris from the earthquake blocks inlets, catch basins, and pipes of the stormwater system will influence service restoration. 
 Heavy rainstorms during the recovery period will complicate repair efforts by overloading drainage and wastewater systems.
 If customers hookups are damaged, service cannot be restored until the hookups are repaired. Turning the service back on at the hookup will likely require inspection by trained personnel, of whom there is a limited number.
 The time required to restore service to a particular area will be affected by decisions about the priorities and schedule for restoration of one affected area over another. 
 Temporary measures can be taken to restore service quickly while permanent repairs are being made. These measures include temporarily bypassing damaged sections of pipes.
 The speed with which repairs are made is limited by the availability of repair crews. Such personnel often require credentials, so their numbers cannot be quickly augmented after an earthquake.
 Repair crews, including private contractors, must be able to use roads and bridges. Debris will have to be cleared before they can access damaged facilities. Repairs will be delayed if crews are not given access at the same time as emergency response vehicles. Because private contractors may not be easy to identify as contractors of the utility company, they may not be granted access.
 Mutual aid for augmenting repair crews is unlikely to be available in a large Cascadia subduction zone event because of the expected widespread damage.
 The availability for delivery of parts and equipment needed to repair and replace damaged sections of the system will affect the time required to make repairs. Most utilities do not maintain large inventories of pipes, fittings, and other parts.
 The time period within which temporary service measures and repairs can be made will depend on the status of communications systems and whether there are functional backup communication systems.
 On-site backup power will likely be needed at control centers, treatment plants, and pump and lift stations to ensure that these facilities continue to function. Some pump stations do not have generators and instead are connected to two different electrical substations for redundancy. This meets EPA requirements, but will not provide power in the instance of widespread power outage. Pump stations are not required for gravity-fed systems.
 Depending on the amount of fuel located at the facility and whether additional fuel can be delivered, the facility may lose backup power before the primary power is restored.
 If on-site backup power is not available, mobile generators may be delivered. This will require access to roadways and bridges. The lack of external quick hookups for connecting mobile generators may increase service restoration time.
In general, systems and facilities that are located in and on competent soils, such as on plateaus, are likely to sustain less damage during an earthquake. Those that have been appropriately designed or seismically upgraded may be restored within a week. Systems located in areas where soils are prone to liquefaction are likely to experience significant damage and will therefore take longer to restore. For example, most of the wastewater treatment facilities that serve communities along the I-5 corridorsuch as Everett, Seattle, and Tacomaare located on liquefiable soils. Liquefaction will cause sewers and non-pile supported pump stations to float or be displaced. Full restoration of these systems and facilities could take as long as two years. 
 Recommendations
 Quantify how much of the wastewater system will not be functioning for 13 years following an earthquake. Compare the results and expected effects with the recent experience of Japan following the M9.0 earthquake near the east coast of Honshu.  
 Discuss with decision makers and the public the issues related to discharging sewage into rivers after an earthquake.  
 Require that utilities have backup generators at treatment plants as well as at pump and lift stations. Do not allow the use of the connection of stations to two different electrical substations to satisfy this requirement.
 Regulate anchorage of equipment.
 Require all wastewater utilities to assess the earthquake risk of their systems, including expected outage time and public health, environmental impacts, and economic damage to the utility and the community. Develop a plan to improve the system to meet the desired level of service, estimate the costs of improvement, and assess the cost of the improvements compared to expected losses. This should be done as part of the water system comprehensive planning process and updated on a regular basis.
 Require all new and retrofitted wastewater facilities, including pipelines, and all existing sewers 24-inches in diameter or greater, to be functional following the design earthquake. 
Flood Control
This component consists of the dams, levees (including both manmade and natural river banks), and other structures that reduce the likelihood of impacts from flooding.   
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Dams: 1 week month
 Levees: 1 week month
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 
 Dams: 1 month3 months
 Levees: 1 year3 years
The actual restoration and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 The time needed to make repairs depends on the total length of the damaged levees.
 Damage to flood control depends on the particular level of ground shaking at a location, which is influenced by factors such as fault proximity, topography, and soil type.
 Levees that are located in liquefiable soils are susceptible to greater damage and will take longer to repair. Landslides and settlement will also affect repair times.
 Repair times are influenced by the availability of repair crews and whether the transportation system has been sufficiently restored to allow crews to access damaged structures.
 Access to and time required to repair levees depends on whether they are located on public or private property.
 Some levees will need to be accredited for the National Flood Insurance Program.
Because Washingtons dams were built to a high seismic design standard,1 they are expected to perform well in earthquakes as severe as the Seattle fault scenario and the Cascadia subduction zone scenario. 
The states extensive levee system, on the other hand, may be extensively damaged. Less than two percent of Washingtons levees were designed to the seismic standards of the Corp of Army Engineers,2 and even this standard is not sufficient to address the intensity of ground shaking anticipated in the Seattle fault or Cascadia subduction zone scenarios.    
 Recommendations
 Assess the state levee systems risk with respect to ground motion and liquefaction. This can be done using information from the USGS, Department of Natural Resources, and Department of Ecology.
 Require that seismic design standards be met in some areas to receive National Flood Insurance accreditation.
 See general recommendations.
Electricity
This component consists of generation facilities, substations, transmission towers, transmission lines and equipment, distribution poles and equipment, and control centers. It does not include hookups on customers private property: these must be repaired by the property owner. Nevertheless, private residences and facilities will likely require inspection before service can be restored.
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 1 week month
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 
 Transmission: 1year3 years
 Distribution: 60% restored in 1 week month; 70% restored in 1 month3 months; greater than 70% restored in 3 monthsyear
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 Factors such as fault proximity, topography, and soil type are likely to increase the level of ground motion and the time required to repair damaged components. 
 Repairs will depend on the extent of damage to transmission towers, substations, and lines as a result of earthquake-induced ground failures (e.g. landslides).
 Because high voltage transmission substations are more vulnerable than low voltage distribution substations, they are likely to suffer more damage and require extensive repairs.
 The number of substations that are damaged affects the redundancy of the system and the companys ability to reroute electricity in order to maintain service.
 If power generation or transmission went out of service before distribution, the number and geographic extent of needed repairs is likely to be larger and will require more time to repair.
 The extent of damage and the time required to repair above-ground structures will be reduced if the structures have been appropriately designed. Older structures that have not been upgraded are likely to suffer greater damage.
 The equipment (such as racks of capacitors and batteries) inside power plants, substations, and control centers is more likely to be damaged if it is not properly anchored. This will increase the time needed to restore service.
 If customers hookups are damaged, service cannot be restored until the hookups are repaired. Turning the service back on at the hookup will likely require inspection by trained personnel, of whom there is a limited number.
 The time required to restore service to a particular area will be affected by decisions about the priorities and schedule for restoration of one affected area over another. 
 Temporary measures can be taken to restore service quickly while permanent repairs are being made. For example, damaged monitoring or safety equipment, such as lightning arrestors or circuit breakers, can be bypassed.
 The speed with which repairs are made is limited by the availability of repair crews. Such personnel often require credentials, so their numbers cannot be quickly augmented after an earthquake.
 Repair crews, including private contractors, must be able to use roads and bridges. Debris will have to be cleared before they can access damaged facilities. Repairs will be delayed if crews are not given access at the same time as emergency response vehicles. Because private contractors may not be easy to identify as contractors of the utility company, they may not be granted access.
 Mutual aid for augmenting repair crews is unlikely to be available in a large Cascadia subduction zone event because of the expected widespread damage.
 The availability for delivery of the parts and equipment needed to repair and replace damaged sections of the system will affect the time required to make repairs. Most utilities do not maintain large inventories of pipes, fittings, and other parts. High voltage transformers are extremely expensive, take a long time to manufacture, and are difficult to transport.
 The time period within which temporary service measures and repairs can be made will depend on the status of communications systems and whether there are functional backup communication systems.
 The post disaster demand for electricity and whether the utilities companies can communicate with major customers to reduce large loads influences their ability to turn circuits back on.
 Winter weather and cold temperatures could lengthen the recovery timeframe.
High voltage (500 kV and 230 kV) transmission substations tend to be the most vulnerable parts of the system, and it could take months to replace damaged transformers, which are designed for specific substations and manufactured in Asia. Replacement of damaged substations depends heavily on the state of the transportation system: Substations must be transported along routes that are equipped or reinforced to take a substations size and weight. Historically, transmission tower failures have occurred only as a result of ground failures. Areas affected by landslides could experience a lengthier recovery timeframe. 
On the whole, power transmission systems are considered to be robust, and there is enough redundancy in the electrical grid to allow service to continue even if several substations are damaged. Also, in the event of an earthquake, additional utilities repair personnel can be brought in to assist the regular repair crews. 
The estimates in the table reflect the time needed to restore the electrical grid/system. Damage to residences, industrial facilities, and commercial buildings must also be repaired, inspected, and approved before these structures can be reconnected to the grid. In some cases, this could take longer than six months. 
For many people, however, service will be restored before the wider system is fully repaired. To facilitate the broader restoration of the system, customers with electrical power may have to curtail their use of electricity or put up with rolling blackouts. Temporary solutions, such as mobile power plants provided by the Army Corps of Engineers or the use of backup power provided by nuclear submarines or carriers, may be implemented in some locations.
 Recommendations
 Create a national or regional standard for replacement parts (such as transformers) for electrical systems. Alternatively, consider in advance how systems will or can be modified to make use of parts from other power companies.
 Regulate anchorage of equipment.
 Analyze the benefit of decentralized power generation and smart-grid technology on seismic resilience.
 See general recommendations.
Natural Gas
This component includes natural gas transmission pipelines and facilities, as well as the owners and operators of the pipelines. It does not include pipelines and hookups on customers private property: these must be repaired by the property owner. Nevertheless, private residences and facilities will likely require inspection before service can be restored.
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Transmission: 13 days
 Distribution: 1 week month
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 
 Transmission: 13 days in zones of no liquefaction; 1 week month in liquefaction zones
 Distribution: 40% restored in 1 week month; 90% restored in 1 month3 months
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 Damage will be more severe and require more extensive repair if the fault rupture is coincident with a pipeline.
 A significant amount of time will be needed to repair components located in liquefaction zones (such as Harbor Island in Seattle) or areas subject to other ground failure. Any settlement of pipes will prevent flow in gravity flow systems. Pile-supported facilities are less likely to suffer significant damage.
 Factors such as fault proximity, topography, and soil type are likely to increase the level of ground motion and the time required to repair damaged components. 
 The extent of damage and time required to repair above-ground structures will be reduced if the structures have been appropriately designed. Older structures that have not been upgraded are likely to suffer greater damage.
 The equipment (such as backup power systems) inside control centers is more likely to be damaged if it is not properly anchored. This will increase the time needed to restore service.
 The time required to make repairs will depend on the number of leaks and breaks, as well as the speed with which leaks and breaks can be accessed and identified.
 Flooded pipes will have to be cleaned; this will lengthen the restoration time.
 If customers hookups are damaged, service cannot be restored until the hookups are repaired. Turning the service back on at the hookup will likely require inspection by trained personnel, of whom there is a limited number.
 The time required to restore service to a particular area will be affected by decisions about the priorities and schedule for restoration of one affected area over another. 
 Temporary measures can be taken to restore service quickly while permanent repairs are being made. These measures include temporarily bypassing damaged sections of pipes.
 The speed with which repairs are made is limited by the availability of repair crews. Such personnel often require credentials, so their numbers cannot be quickly augmented after an earthquake.
 Repair crews, including private contractors, must be able to use roads and bridges. Debris will have to be cleared before they can access damaged facilities. Repairs will be delayed if crews are not given access at the same time as emergency response vehicles. Because private contractors may not be easy to identify as contractors of the utility company, they may not be granted access.
 Mutual aid for augmenting repair crews is unlikely to be available in a large Cascadia subduction zone event because of the expected widespread damage.
 The availability for delivery of parts and equipment needed to repair and replace damaged sections of the system will affect the time required to make repairs. Most utilities do not maintain large inventories of pipes, fittings, and other parts.
 The time period within which temporary service measures and repairs can be made will depend on the status of communications systems and whether there are functional backup communication systems.
 On-site backup power will likely be needed at control centers, compressor stations, and regulator stations to ensure that these facilities continue to function.
 Depending on the amount of fuel located at the facility and whether additional fuel can be delivered, the facility may lose backup power before the primary power is restored.
 If on-site backup power is not available, mobile generators may be delivered. This will require access to roadways and bridges. The lack of external quick hookups for connecting mobile generators may increase service restoration time. 
 Repair crews and qualified personnel must be available to relight customers appliances. Such personnel often require credentials, so their numbers cannot be quickly augmented after an earthquake.
 A number of customers will turn off their gas or have an earthquake actuated shutoff valve. In past earthquakes, the majority of customers who turned off their gas did so needlessly. Unnecessary shutoffs increase the work load and thus the time required for natural gas employees or qualified professionals to relight customers appliances.
Pipeline damage is most likely to occur as a result of liquefaction and landslides on steep slopes. While very strong ground shaking can damage pipelines, it is more likely to damage the above-ground facilities. Based on past experience of earthquakes in the western United States, modern, buried, arc-welded pipelines made of high-carbine steel are expected to perform well. Pipeline operators have replacement pipes on hand and are normally able to repair breaks in a matter of days. 
The Washington Utilities and Transportation Commissions Pipeline Safety Section and the Washington State Department of Ecology must approve repair plans and operations. Once repaired, the pipeline may have to operate at reduced pressure for a while, and inspections of the pipeline may continue for several months to confirm its integrity.
In addition, homes must be inspected and approved before the gas can be hooked up to them again. The time needed to accomplish such inspections will depend on the number of qualified inspectors available, and the estimates provided in the table do not include this final step.  
 Recommendations
 Require on-site backup power for critical components of the system. 
 Regulate anchorage of equipment.
 See general recommendations.
Petroleum
This component includes petroleum (gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and crude oil) transmission pipelines, terminals, and refineries, as well as their owners and operators. It does not include pipelines and hookups on customers private property: these must be repaired by the owners of the property.
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Refineries and transmission: 1 week month
 Distribution: 37 days
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 
 Refineries and transmission: 1 year3 years
 Distribution: 1 month3 months
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 Damage will be more severe and require more extensive repair if the fault rupture is coincident with a pipeline.
 A significant amount of time will be needed to repair components located in liquefaction zones (such as Harbor Island in Seattle) or areas subject to other ground failure. Any settlement of pipes will prevent flow in gravity flow systems. Pile-supported facilities are less likely to suffer significant damage.
 Factors such as fault proximity, topography, and soil type are likely to increase the level of ground motion and the time required to repair damaged components. 
 The extent of damage and the time required to repair above-ground structures will be reduced if the structures have been appropriately designed. Older structures that have not been upgraded are likely to suffer greater damage.
 The equipment (such as backup power systems) inside control centers is more likely to be damaged if it is not properly anchored. This will increase the time needed to restore service.
 The time required to make repairs will depend on the number of leaks and breaks, as well as the speed with which leaks and breaks can be accessed and identified.
 If customers hookups are damaged, service cannot be restored until the hookups are repaired. Turning the service back on at the hookup will likely require inspection by trained personnel, of whom there is a limited number.
 The speed with which repairs are made is limited by the availability of repair crews. Such personnel often require credentials, so their numbers cannot be quickly augmented after an earthquake.
 Repair crews, including private contractors, must be able to use roads and bridges. Debris will have to be cleared before they can access damaged facilities. Repairs will be delayed if crews are not given access at the same time as emergency response vehicles. Because private contractors may not be easy to identify as contractors of the utility company, they may not be granted access.
 Mutual aid for augmenting repair crews is unlikely to be available in a large Cascadia subduction zone event because of the expected widespread damage.
 The availability for delivery of the parts and equipment needed to repair and replace damaged sections of the system will affect the time required to make repairs. Most utilities do not maintain large inventories of pipes, fittings, and other parts.
 The time period within which temporary service measures and repairs can be made will depend on the status of communications systems and whether there are functional backup communication systems.
 On-site backup power will likely be needed at control centers, pump stations, and refineries to ensure that these facilities continue to function. 
 Depending on the amount of fuel located at the facility and whether additional fuel can be delivered, the facility may lose backup power before the primary power is restored.
 If on-site backup power is not available, mobile generators may be delivered. This will require access to roadways and bridges. The lack of external quick hookups for connecting mobile generators may increase service restoration time. 
Pipeline damage is most likely to occur as a result of liquefaction and landslides on steep slopes. While very strong ground shaking can damage pipelines, it is more likely to damage the above-ground facilities. Based on past experience of earthquakes in the western United States, modern, buried, arc-welded pipelines made of high-carbine steel are expected to perform well. Damaged refineries, however, could take a long time to fix.
The Washington Utilities and Transportation Commissions Pipeline Safety Section and the Washington State Department of Ecology must approve repair plans and operations. Once repaired, the pipeline may have to operate at reduced capacity for a considerable period of time, possibly years. 
During the recovery period, consumers may have to use petroleum products that are refined elsewhere and brought in by truck or barge. The price of these supplies will be high, and there will be considerable competition for them. 
 Recommendations
 Require on-site backup power for critical components of the system. 
 Regulate anchorage of equipment.
 See general recommendations.
Information and Communication Technology
This component consists of a wide range of communications systems and technologies, including hard-wired telephone and cable TV systems, wireless cellular phone systems, and 800 MHZ public service radio systems. Most communications services are provided by privately owned and operated companies, although the 800 MHZ, which is used primarily by police, fire, and emergency medical response agencies, is publicly owned and controlled. 
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 37 days
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 1 month3 months 
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example:
 Factors such as fault proximity, topography, and soil type are likely to increase the level of ground motion and the time required to repair the systems damaged components. 
 The extent of damage and the time required to restore service depends on whether buildings that house key elements of systems, such as Internet hubs or land-line central offices, have been engineered or seismically retrofitted to withstand the level of ground shaking experienced.
 Equipment, such as uninterruptable power supplies, that is not properly anchored will likely be damaged. This will increase the time needed to restore service.
 If customers hookups are damaged, service cannot be restored until these hookups are repaired. 
 The time required to restore service to a particular area will be affected by decisions about the priorities and schedule for restoration of one affected area over another. 
 The speed with which repairs are made is limited by the availability of repair crews. Such personnel often require credentials, so their numbers cannot be quickly augmented after an earthquake.
 Repair crews, including private contractors, must be able to use roads and bridges. Debris will have to be cleared before they can access damaged facilities. Repairs will be delayed if crews are not given access at the same time as emergency response vehicles. Because private contractors may not be easy to identify as contractors of the utility company, they may not be granted access.
 Mutual aid for augmenting repair crews is unlikely to be available in a large Cascadia subduction zone event because of the expected widespread damage.
 The time period within which repairs can be made will depend on the status of backup communications systems.
 The service restoration estimates in the table assume that the ICT systems are equipped with effective backup generators. The installation of such generators is common practice in the industry.
On the whole, the hard-wired systems are expected to perform well. For example, most installations have emergency power. Wireless communications systems may be less robust.
All of these systems (hard-wired, wireless, and 800MHZ) may be overloaded by users in the aftermath of an earthquake. This is of particular concern in the case of emergency responders, for whom communication with dispatchers and other responders is essential. 
 Recommendations
 Require on-site backup power for critical components of the system. 
 Regulate anchorage of equipment.
 See general recommendations.
General Recommendations
 Plan for, invest in, and prioritize temporary strategies, such as generators, water, and fuel delivery.
 Plan for and prioritize debris management.
 Plan for, invest in, and prioritize repair-parts supply chains. Evaluate approval/inspection policies in light of post-disaster situations.
 Consider regulations/rules for prioritizing service restoration to critical facilities.
 Create a separate Resilient Utilities process to further investigate this sector. 
 Create a permanent utilities committee of utility service providers that works on disaster planning and exercises.
 Review the states rules and regulations and create an inventory of those that may pose challenges during the recovery phase. Create a process for developing potential alternative solutions that would better fit a recovery situation, making sure that the need to expedite permits is balanced with the need to ensure the quality and safety of repairs and the protection of the environment. (Such an examination should involve utilities managers and providers as well as government decision makers and regulators.) Communicate the results (the status of the various rules and regulations after an earthquake) to local jurisdictions and relevant industries.
 Develop a process that identifies the person, group, or agency with authority to decide who should have priority for emergency resources (such as backup generators and fuel).
 Develop some form of credentialing for repair crews in emergency situations.
 Mandate that infrastructure providers determine their risk and make such risk assessments available (in some form) to the state and other providers. 
 Analyze incentives that can be offered by the state to utility providers to encourage them to invest in mitigation. 
 Ensure that there is appropriate redundancy in communication systems.
 Do large scale mapping of liquefaction, landslide, and fault rupture hazards to identify possible damage locations of utility components.
 Consider separately the restoration of permanent service and the restoration of temporary service. Identify targets and capacity estimates for both, and offer recommendations for both the temporary solutions (such as backup generators) and the permanent restoration of service. Also, identify the interdependencies of the temporary solutions, which tend to be more complex than the interdependencies of permanent repairs. 

Transportation Sector
The following table provides a summary of the estimated timeframes for recovery of key components of the infrastructure, systems, and services of the Transportation sector in the state of Washington. The Xs indicate the sector groups best educated guess regarding the current timeframe for the response and recovery of each component and subcomponent after a scenario earthquake. The colored areas represent the goals or targets for each component and subcomponent. (These targets indicate the recovery timeframes that are needed to achieve resilience in the state of Washington.) The gaps between the Xs and the colored areas reveal the need for further evaluation, policies, and actions to improve Washingtons resilience.
KEY TO THE TABLE
TARGETS TO ACHIEVE DIFFERENT LEVELS OF RECOVERY:

Minimal (A minimum level of service is restored, primarily for the use of emergency responders, repair crews, and vehicles transporting food and other critical supplies.)


Functional (Although service is not yet restored to full capacity, it is sufficient to get the economy moving againe.g. some truck/freight traffic can be accommodated. There may be fewer lanes in use, some weight restrictions, and lower speed limits.)


Operational (Restoration is up to 80-90% of capacity: A full level of service has been restored and is sufficient to allow people to commute to school and to work.) 

TIME NEEDED FOR RECOVERY TO 80-90% OPERATIONAL GIVEN CURRENT CONDITIONS:

For a number of components, the timeframes marked in the table reflect the estimated recovery period following a worst case scenario earthquake. See the notes following the table for details. 
For interstates, state routes, and state bridges, WSDOT anticipates meeting these targets in considerably less time than 50 years. 





TARGET STATES OF RECOVERY: WASHINGTONS TRANSPORTATION SECTOR  

Event occurs
024 hours
13 days
37 days
1 week    1 month
1 month  3 months
3 months    1 year
1 year 3 years
3 + years
Interstate 5









     Puget Sound (center & north end) 









     South end (Chehalis south)









Interstate 90     









     Puget Sound (Snoqualmie  Pass
     west) 









     Cascades to eastern WA
     (Snoqualmie to Idaho)









Interstate 405









     South end (Tukwila to I-90)









     North end (I-90 to Lynnwood)









Ferry operations









Floating Bridges









     SR 520









     I-90









     Hood Canal 









25% of major & minor arterials









50% of major & minor arterials









75% of major & minor arterials









90% of major & minor arterials









Airports









Airport for emergency traffic









Ports and navigable waterways









Rail (freight & passenger)









Mass transit3










Event occurs
024 hours
13 days
37 days
1 week    1 month
1 month  3 months
3 months    1 year
1 year 3 years
3 + years

Interstates and Floating Bridges
This component consists of Interstates 5, 90, and 405 and floating bridges SR 520, I-90, and Hood Canal. 
Target timeframe for response and recovery: between 13 days and 13 months, depending on location
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: between 3 months year and 13 years, depending on location
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 The number of WSDOT personnel who are able to report to work may be limited by a variety of circumstances, including where personnel were at the time of the earthquake and whether they sustained injuries.
 Bridges and roadways in the areas affected by the earthquake must be inspected. How long this takes will depend on the number and accessibility of the structures and the availability of qualified inspectors.  
 Some bridges and segments of road may be rendered unusable or only partially usable as a result of the earthquake or secondary effects. The response and recovery timeframe will depend on the number, the location, and the extent of the damage.  
 Certain earthquake scenarios could result in damage to the Ballard Locks and cause the water level in Lake Washington to drop below the level required to operate the floating bridges. 
 Depending on the scenario and local conditions, liquefaction and slope failure could damage both interstates and planned detours. 
During the first three days after the event, the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) will inspect bridges and begin repairs as needed. WSDOTs first priority will be to open key routes for emergency response vehicles. Subsequent phases of recovery will include setting up detours where necessary and regulating the type and volume of traffic in order to give the public as much access as possible while damaged roads and bridges are repaired. 
WSDOT has instituted a program to retrofit existing bridges.4 Retrofit priorities are based on seismic risk, deficiencies in structural detail, and the importance of the route as a lifeline corridor. The current goal of the bridge retrofit program is to prevent collapse and not necessarily to ensure full operation following an earthquake.The current program does not address any impacts associated with ground movement on existing bridge foundations, roadway sub-grades, or slope stability.WSDOTs approach has been developed based on observed damage to similar systems around the world and cost implications.WSDOT has reported that earthquake damage to bridge structures around the world has primarily been focused on the superstructure-to-substructure connection and columns.From a cost/benefit standpoint, WSDOT has determined that retrofitting for ground movement due to liquefaction or foundation stability is not the best use of the limited available funds.WSDOT does address liquefaction effects on new projects and bridge widening projects, but not as stand-alone remediation work.
Over 45 percent of the bridges listed in the program have been completely or partially retrofitted or are currently under contract for retrofitting. Retrofitting of the remaining bridges will proceed as funds permit. 
 I-5: The current focus of retrofitting (which is progressing from south to north) is the corridor between Joint Base Lewis-McChord and the I-5 and I-90 Interchange in Seattle. I-5 should be fully hardened within the next 10 years. WSDOT is evaluating the benefits of retrofitting one direction on sections of I-5 with long viaducts in the initial stage. This approach will expedite the pace at which segments of the lifeline routes can be retrofitted to carry at least limited bi-directional traffic.
 I-90: All but six retrofits have been completed up to Snoqualmie Pass, making this a feasible route for transporting emergency personnel, supplies, and equipment from Grant County International Airport (Moses Lake) to sites in western Washington. 
 Recommendations
 Undertake a more thorough statewide investigation and assessment of the liquefaction hazard and its potential effects, focusing particularly on the highest acceleration zones. 
 Provide WSDOT with more direction regarding the routes that should be hardened to provide the best access into and out of the Kent Valley. 
Ferry Operations
This component consists of the fleet of 22 ferries and 20 terminals that the Washington State Department of Transportation operates in Puget Sound for the use of commuters, tourists, and commercial vehicles. 
Target timeframe for response and recovery: between 024 hours and 1week month
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 3 months year
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors, including: 
 The status of upgrades and retrofitting of key facilities and equipment.
 The number of terminals that are damaged by the earthquake or secondary effects (such as liquefaction, landslides, and flooding) and the extent of that damage.
Because ferry terminals are located next to the water, their facilities are often constructed on soils that are prone to liquefaction. Their location also makes them vulnerable to flooding from tsunamis and seiches.
Following an earthquake in the Puget Sound region, the ferry system will experience an increase in the number of users while the road systems are being repaired. The ferry system has a good emergency response and recovery plan and is prepared to perform a role after the earthquake that the ferries do not perform now. 
After an earthquake, ferries will operate initially in pedestrian-only mode.
WSDOT is also creating traffic models to address the off-loading of vehicles and corresponding increase in traffic around terminals when ferries dock. This analysis may provide useful information for both WSDOT and local planners.
 Recommendations
Solicit input from port administrators to identify which transportation routes are most crucial to port operations so that WSDOT and local transportation planners can prioritize these routes for seismic retrofitting
Major and Minor Arterials
This component encompasses arterial roadways (including bridges) other than the interstates. It therefore includes state highways and many city and county roads.
Target timeframe for response and recovery: between 024 hours and 3 months year, depending on location; the percentage of roadways that are open for use will increase over this period.
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: between 1 week month and 13 years, depending on location; the percentage of roadways that are open for use will increase over this period.
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors, including: 
 The amount of time it takes to inspect bridges and roadways in the areas affected by the earthquake.
 The number of bridges and segments of road that are rendered unusable or only partially usable as a result of the earthquake or secondary effects.
 The extent to which liquefaction and slope failure cause damage to both roadways and planned detours. 
 Recommendations
 Develop interagency agreements between WSDOT and local jurisdictions to facilitate the rerouting of traffic (as needed) following an earthquake. 
 Encourage counties and cities to work together to identify lifeline corridors and prioritize and retrofit bridges to serve the greatest need. Include mass transit agencies, school districts, postal services, businesses, and other agencies that rely on these roadways in these discussions. 
o Investigate what is being done by cities and counties to identify alternate routes.
o Tie both primary and secondary arterials to transit, snow, and evacuation routes to help communities identify their lifelines.
Airports
Target timeframe for response and recovery: between 024 hours and 1week month
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 3 months year
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 Depending on the earthquake scenario and soil conditions, liquefaction may affect the usability of some runways.
 If upgrades and retrofitting of key facilities and equipment has not been completed before the earthquake, these structures are likely to sustain greater damage.
 Extensive damage to fuel lines and other essential utilities may substantially slow the recovery.
 The number of airport personnel who are able to report to work may be limited by a variety of circumstances, including where personnel were at the time of the earthquake and whether they are able to travel to and from work following the earthquake.
On the whole, airports are built on good ground, and WSDOTs lifeline corridor does include connectivity to airports. WSDOT: 
 Has retrofitted SR 518 to SeaTac Airport.
 Is retrofitting I-5 to Joint Base Lewis-McCord.
 Will retrofit SR 525 to Paine Field.  
WSDOT is also working on I-5 by King County Airport. 
If fuel lines are damaged, jet fuel can be transported in by air until repairs are completed.
 Recommendations
 Standardize post-disaster damage assessment and reporting.
 Assess whether routes to and from airports are sufficiently hardened; retrofit these routes if needed.
Ports and Navigable Waterways
This component consists of Washington system of ports and shipping routes, including piers, wharves, seawalls, container storage yards, marinas, and other facilities and equipment on which the operations of the ports depend. 
Target timeframe for response and recovery: between 37 days and 13 months
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 13 years
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors, including: 
 The extent of damage caused by the earthquake, particularly such secondary effects as liquefaction, landslides, and flooding. 
 The status of upgrades and retrofitting of key facilities and equipment.
Because ports are built alongside the water, their facilities are often constructed on soils that are prone to liquefaction. Their location also makes them vulnerable to flooding from tsunamis and seiches.
The vulnerability of ports is of particular concern because of the serious short- and long-term economic impacts that the state will experience if ports are slow to recover from an earthquake. In particular, ports that do not recover quickly will permanently lose a significant part of their customer base to other competing ports located outside of the region.  
 Recommendations
 Compel ports to step up efforts to assess the seismic vulnerability of their facilities and equipment. 
 Compel ports to retrofit existing port facilities to improve their capacity to recover quickly from earthquakes and secondary effects.  
 Ensure that ports have backup facilities for the critical aspects of port administration. Backup facilities should be located in areas outside the zones likely to be damaged by earthquakes.  
 Solicit input from port administrators to identify which transportation routes are most crucial to port operations so that WSDOT can prioritize these routes for seismic retrofitting.
Rail
This component includes both passenger rail services and the freight services provided by numerous privately owned railroad companies, along with the tracks, bridges, overpasses, signal systems, and other facilities and equipment on which they depend.
Target timeframe for response and recovery: between 37 days and 13 months
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 13 years
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors, including: 
 The number and extent of earthquake-induced landslides that block and damage rail lines. 
The primary objective following an earthquake will be the restoration of freight traffic. Landslides are the key concern. (WSDOT is using federal funds to mitigate this for light rail.) In general freight services will resume immediately after a landslide is cleared, but passenger services will wait 24 hours. 
 Recommendations
Determine whether the rail companies have considered the possible effects of liquefaction when assessing the vulnerability of rail lines and bridges.
Mass Transit
This component includes all public transportation systems other than the ferry system.5 Because these systemsand public buses in particulardepend on the functionality of roadways and bridges, the recovery of mass transit will depend predominately on the recovery of the network of major and minor arterials along which mass transit routes run.
Target timeframe for response and recovery: between 024 hours and 3 months year, depending on location; the percentage of roadways that are open for use will increase over this period.
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: between 1 week month and 13 years, depending on location; the percentage of roadways that are open for use will increase over this period.
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 Bridges and roadways in the areas affected by the earthquake must be inspected. How long this takes will depend on the number and accessibility of the structures and the availability of qualified inspectors.  
 Some bridges and segments of road may be rendered unusable or only partially usable as a result of the earthquake or secondary effects. The response and recovery timeframe will depend on the number, the location, and the extent of the damage.  
 Depending on the scenario and local conditions, liquefaction and slope failure could damage both interstates and planned detours. 
 Fuel may be unavailable or available only in limited quantities following the earthquake. 
 Some transit facilities may incur damage as a result of the earthquake or secondary effects.
 The speed with which repairs are made will depend on a number of factors, including the availability of spare parts. 
 The number of transit employees who are able to report to work may be limited by a variety of circumstances, including where personnel were at the time of the earthquake and whether they are able to travel to and from work following the earthquake.
 Recommendations
 Identify, review, and update interagency agreements between WSDOT and local jurisdictions to facilitate the rerouting of traffic (as needed) following an earthquake. Develop such agreements where they do not currently exist. Review interagency agreements annually. 
 Encourage counties and cities to work together to prioritize and retrofit bridges to serve the greatest need. Include mass transit agencies in these discussions.
 Encourage transit companies to assess the earthquake vulnerabilities of their facilities and to gather information about recommended facility updates designed to minimize damage in the event of an earthquake. 
 Incorporate earthquake scenarios into regular company emergency planning drills.
 Identify, review, and update the continuity of operations plans of all transit agencies (large and small). Develop such plans where they do not currently exist. Review continuity of operations plans annually.
General Recommendations
 As part of pre-earthquake planning, identify the people who will need to participate in the decision making process by means of which alternate routes will be selected after an earthquake occurs.  
 Develop a means of educating the public about how to get around in the event of an earthquake/disaster.

Housing and Economic Development
The following table provides a summary of the estimated timeframes for recovery of key components of the infrastructure, systems, and services of the Housing and Economic Development sector in the state of Washington. The Xs indicate the sector groups best educated guess regarding the current timeframe for the response and recovery of each component and subcomponent after a scenario earthquake. The colored areas represent the goals or targets for each component and subcomponent. (These targets indicate the recovery timeframes that are necessary to achieve resilience in the state of Washington.) The gaps between the Xs and the shaded areas reveal the need for further evaluation, policies, and actions to improve Washingtons resilience.
KEY TO THE TABLE
TARGETS TO ACHIEVE DIFFERENT LEVELS OF RECOVERY:

Minimal


Functional:


Operational* (time it ought to take to restore component to 80-90% operational):

TIME NEEDED FOR RECOVERY TO 80-90% OPERATIONAL GIVEN CURRENT CONDITIONS:

For a number of components, the timeframes marked in the table reflect the estimated recovery period following a worst case scenario earthquake. See the notes following the table for details.


TERMS USED IN THE TABLE
 Occupiable: The housing unit is structurally sound, safe, and sanitary (sewer and water are available within the dwelling unit or in close proximity), and people can use it to shelter in place following the earthquake.
 Mid-rise structures: 4 to 10 stories
 High-rise structures: Higher than 10 stories



TARGET STATES OF RECOVERY: WASHINGTONS HOUSING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT SECTOR  

Event occurs
024 hours
13 days
37 days
1 week    1 month
1 month  3 months
3 months    1 year
1 year 3 years
3 + years
Finance and banking









Commerce (commercial facilities)









Real estate and construction









Manufacturing (industrial facilities)









Planning and community development









Unreinforced masonry structures









Housing









     Detached single-family residential 
     (pre-1950)









     Detached single-family residential
     (post 1950)









     Mid- and high-rise structures (pre-
     1977)









     Mid- and high-rise structures (post
     1977)










Finance and Banking
The finance and banking component includes local branches of banks, ATM machines, and insurance providers.
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Minimum level: within 13 days, at least 50% of services will be restored. 
 Functional level: within 37 days, at least 75% of services will be restored. 
 Operational level: within 1 week month, at least 90% of services will be restored.  
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 37 days
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 If the communications network is damaged or overwhelmed by users, it may be unable to support electronic transactions and communication between banks and branches.
 Damage to roads, bridges, and other transportation infrastructure may prevent vehicles from bringing cash and generators into areas damaged by the earthquake or secondary effects. The availability of vehicles may also be limited.
 The overall speed of this components recovery depends significantly on the speed with which electricity is restored, particularly to ATMs.
 The timeframe required to bring in building inspectors to determine whether buildings are usable and to assess the need for repairs or new construction will vary depending on the scenario and local conditions. 
This components initial priorities for recovery will include making cash available to the population, providing emergency loans, processing deposits, and, in the case of insurance, sending personnel in to assess damage and distribute money. 
 Recommendations
Develop a means of coordinating the response and recovery efforts of the finance and banking component with the public emergency response. In particular, a clear connection needs to be established between the public emergency response hub and this components emergency response representatives. The existing forums for coordination within the finance and banking component are CPARM, PNWER, and Washington First, with Washington First having served in the past as the primary contact for emergency response information. 
Commerce (Commercial Facilities)
This component consists of retail businesses (local stores as well as regional and national chains).  
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Minimum level: during the first 13 days, retailers will begin to gain access to facilities and will focus on cleaning up and assessing inventory. 
 Functional level: within 37 days, utilities will be restored, just-in-time inventories will begin to be restocked, and stores will have some ability to provide merchandise to customers. 
 Operational level: within 1 week month, stores will be able to restock and sell merchandise with few limitations. 
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 1 month3 months
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 The state of the transportation infrastructure, including service roads, will determine the ability of businesses to transport goods and restock just-in-time inventories. 
 Retailers are dependent upon the speed of the overall economic recovery: in particular, the ability and willingness of consumersmany of whom may have temporarily or permanently left the affected areato make purchases. 
 Commercial buildings that were not designed to withstand an earthquake and that have not been seismically retrofitted are more likely to sustain serious damage during an earthquake. The length of the recovery period will depend on the extent of the damage and the number of buildings affected. 
 If the communications and internet systems are damaged or overwhelmed by users, they may be unable to support the processing of transactions. 
 Recommendations
 Mandate a process of inspection for commercial structures to determine whether structural and nonstructural retrofitting has been done. Such a review and checklist would be done by the seller/owner when the building is to be sold or refinanced. 
 Develop legislation that determines who will be permitted to initiate repairs so as to keep local resources engaged; develop small-works rosters of local trades-people. 
 Develop a plan for dealing with point-of-sale issues without electricity.
 Ask the state legislature to consider how funds might be used to keep local jurisdictions from going bankrupt when, following an earthquake, sales tax decreases at all levels.
 For small businesses: 
o Emphasize the importance of continuity planning.
o Explore the possibility of mentoring between big and small businesses. 
o Offer incentives (e.g. low interest loans and government subsidies; for example, if a business does a certain number of things to become more resilient, have the state offer reductions of the B&O tax and insurance premium).
o Fund plans through a reduction in B&O tax. 
o Strengthen & promote mutual aid. 
o Encourage businesses to have remote data backup.
 Review IBC and GMA codes (in connection with commercial facilities) to promote incentive-based retrofitting when possible.
Real Estate and Construction
This component includes construction companies, contractors, and real estate agencies. 
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Minimum level: 13 days 
 Functional level: 37 days 
 Operational level: 1 week month
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 37 days
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example:
 The ability of building owners to get into damaged areas in order to make assessments will be determined by the state of the transportation infrastructure and the speed with which access is restored.
 Damaged structures must be assessed by qualified inspectors, whose numbers and availability may be limited.
 The time required for the local building and planning departments to issue permits will depend on such factors as the availability of personnel and the size of the area affected by the earthquake.
 Debris will have to be removed and disposed of. The length of time this takes will depend on a number of factors, including the size of the area affected, the quantity of the debris, and the state of the transportation system. 
 The availability of building materials, tools, and equipment may be limited, particularly if the demand is great.
 Recommendations
Facilitate mutual-aid agreements and adopt licensing regulations (where these are lacking) that will (1) enhance the abilities of local planning departments to bring in building officials from elsewhere to supplement those in the disaster area and (2) allow businesses to bring in security providers from out of state if necessary.
Manufacturing (Industrial Facilities)
This component includes manufacturers such as Boeing and the buildings and equipment on which they rely. 
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Minimum level: 37 days 
 Functional level: 1 week month 
 Operational level: 13 months
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 1 week month
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors, including: 
 The state of the transportation infrastructure (including rail) and its ability to support the supply system and deliver inventory.
 Whether manufacturing structures in vulnerable areas have been seismically retrofitted.
 The extent of damage to manufacturing instruments, equipment, and other non-structural elements.
 Recommendations
Identify vulnerabilities in the supply chains of manufacturing industries; bring manufacturers together to find alternative suppliers (etc.) to ensure continuity during disasters. 
Planning and Community Development
This component includes building codes, permitting processes, and the capacity of local governments and state agencies to review plans and issue permits for demolition, repairs, and new construction.
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Minimum level: 37 days 
 Functional level: 1 week month 
 Operational level: 1 month3 months
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 1 month3 months
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors. For example: 
 The availability of planning and development staff and their ability to report to work may be limited by a variety of circumstances, including where personnel were at the time of the earthquake and whether they are able to travel to and from work following the earthquake.
 Buildings that house the permitting agencies could be significantly damaged by the earthquake or secondary effects.
 Depending on circumstances, permitting agencies may seek to contract with and bring in additional staff to carry out assessments and permitting. 
 The amount of time it takes to carry out demolition and debris removal will depend on factors such as the size of the area affected, the quantity of the debris, the availability of equipment, and the state of the transportation system.
 The ability of building inspectors to get into damaged areas in order to carry out inspections will be determined by the state of the transportation infrastructure and the speed with which access is restored.
 The existence (prior to the earthquake) of well developed planning and visioning documents that lay the ground work for recovery could help accelerate the recovery of this component.
During the initial phase of recovery, the focus of this component will be on mobilizing qualified inspectors and addressing emergency repairs. To expedite permitting, personnel from other parts of the permitting agency may be reallocated. Also, additional building and permitting officials from other regions may be brought in to help. 
 Recommendations
 Encourage building departments to become more engaged with the mitigation efforts of emergency managers. 
 Give consideration to revisioning both prior to a disaster (e.g. mitigation policies related to post-disaster reuse of land) and after a disaster (e.g. rethink fundamental development, engineering, and design). 
 Develop further means of expediting the process of reviewing and granting permits for construction and reconstruction following an earthquake.
 Strengthen building codes, especially for hospitals and for mid- and high-occupancy facilities. 
 Develop incentives for starting the market for base-isolated, higher performance structures. 
Unreinforced Masonry Structures (URMs)
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 3 months year (for 80% of URMs to be occupiable)
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 3+ years
The actual response and recovery time will depend on a number of factors, including: 
 The number of structures that were seismically retrofitted prior to the earthquake.
 The amount of time it takes to restore the utilities (sewer, water, electricity) to structures that are otherwise undamaged or only minimally damaged. 
 The availability of contractors and building materials.
Unreinforced masonry structures are highly vulnerable to ground shaking and (depending on the location and scenario) are likely to experience severe damage during an earthquake. 
Many buildings that are considered historically significant or serve as community focal points are constructed of unreinforced masonry and are therefore at significant risk. Also, public buildings (such as city halls and courthouses) in many towns and small cities fit into this category of building, which also includes a large number of commercial buildings (such as brick warehouses) and older residential structures. Unreinforced masonry structures can be very expensive to retrofit. Depending on the building, historic preservation issues may also complicate retrofitting and other available mitigation options. 
 Recommendations
 Work with preservation societies to develop plans for retrofitting buildings of historical significance.
 Prepare a more detailed inventory of the actual building stock (types of buildings, dates of construction, and seismic retrofits) in all jurisdictions across the state.
 Work with the Department of Commerce to develop a model code or guidance regarding the various options that exist (e.g. tax breaks) that would encourage owners to retrofit, at least to improve life safety. 
 Implement an ordinance to limit the use of such structuresfor example, prohibit their use as preschools, senior centers, and child care facilities. 
 As an incentive for retrofitting, have the state offer to sign a long-term lease if the owners of the buildings used by the state will invest in retrofitting. Establish a minimum level of resilience and develop a list of options (vetted by qualified engineers) for achieving it.  
Housing
The estimates for this component take into account all residential structures except those constructed of unreinforced masonry (URMs). URMs are addressed separately (see above). 
The estimates for residential buildings differ according to type and date of construction, but in general, the response and recovery timeframes of this component will depend on such factors as: 
 The number of structures that were built recently (and therefore to a higher earthquake standard) or were seismically retrofitted prior to the earthquake.
 The availability of qualified inspectors to determine whether structures are fit for occupation following the earthquake.
 The state of the transportation infrastructure and the amount of time it takes to clear access routes into neighborhoods damaged by the earthquake.
 The amount of time it takes to restore the utilities (sewer, water, electricity) to homes. 
 The amount of time it takes to process and issue building permits for repairs.
 The availability of contractors and building materials.
 The amount of time it takes to process insurance payouts.6 
 Detached Single-Family Residential (Pre-1950)
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Functional level: 75% of homes occupiable within 13 days 
 Operational level: 90% occupiable within 37 days  
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 3 months year
 Detached Single-Family Residential (Post 1950)
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Functional level: 75% of homes occupiable within 024 hours 
 Operational level: 90 % occupiable within 13 days 
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 1 week month
 Mid- and High-rise Structures (Pre-1977)
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Functional level: 50% of structures occupiable within 37 days 
 Operational level: 90% occupiable within 13 months  
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 1 year3 years
This category of housing includes both apartment buildings and condominiums. The performance and recovery of such structures is of particular concern: If it takes longer than three months to restore people to their homes, many people are likely to relocate all together. This would have a detrimental effect on the economy and would slow the recovery of the community as a whole. 
 Mid- and High-rise Structures (Post 1977)
Target timeframe for response and recovery: 
 Functional level: 75% of structures occupiable within 13 days
 Operational level: 90% occupiable within 1 weekmonth   
Anticipated timeframe based on current capacity: 1 month3 months
The actual response and recovery time will also depend on factors such as: 
 The extent of structural damage, such as damage to egress or, in the case of steel structures, damage to connections. 
 The availability of qualified engineers and contractors and the speed with which permits can be granted.
 Fabrication time for steel structures. 
The seismic standards in the building code were significantly strengthened in the mid-1970s. As a result of subsequent evaluations of how buildings performed in actual earthquakes and given additional changes to the code during the 1990s, buildings that were constructed during the 1990s and later are likely to perform better than many structures built in the 1970s and 1980s.  
 Recommendations for Housing
 Prepare a more detailed inventory of the actual building stock (types of buildings, dates of construction, and seismic retrofits) in all jurisdictions across the state.
 Build new structures to a higher seismic standard.
 Develop and implement a public education campaign to inform home/building owners of the incentives for retrofitting and show them how investing in mitigation and risk management will save money in the long run. 
 Develop a simple checklist and disclosure statement to be completed by the seller/owner of a building when the building is to be sold or refinanced. Such a statement would inform the prospective buyer, mortgage holder, and insurer about whether seismic retrofitting or other mitigation has been done (for example, whether the house is or is not bolted to the foundation). 
 Encourage insurance companies to offer a lower rate to building/home owners who certify that they have retrofitted for earthquakes.
 Create a task force to look at insurance models in other countries (e.g. Chile and New Zealand) and develop a model that would work in this state. 
 Develop a loan program that would allow building/home owners to borrow money for the purpose of retrofitting (such loans to be offered by banks, but with state or federal backing). 
 Offer a decrease in state property tax as an incentive for investment in seismic retrofitting.
 Institute a small (1 cent) dedicated sales tax in support of seismic mitigation policies and projects. 
 As part of job training programs associated with the construction field, train people to do retrofitting at minimal cost. (This could involve a partnership with technical colleges, community colleges, or some of the trades in order to offer the job training at low or no cost).
 Develop a prescreening program similar to San Franciscos Building Occupancy Resumption Program (BORP), which allows building owners to pre-certify private post-earthquake inspection of their buildings. (Provided the structure does not exceed a certain level of shaking, the building will automatically have a green tag without the full post-earthquake inspection.)
 Use NetQuakes seismographs (small seismometers that are tied into the seismic network) to provide data to engineers and inspectors to help in the tagging process.
 Invest in the further development of RF identification tags that can be installed in buildings and that will activate during an earthquake and monitor acceleration, displacement, and so on. (Such tags would help speed up assessment and make it more accurate.) 
General Recommendations
Develop a centralized way (for use in disasters) to locate housing, commercial facilities, and manufacturing facilities. 

Summary of Interdependencies
As they identified the recovery timeframes of the various components of Washingtons systems and infrastructure, the four sector groups and the participants in the workshops also discussed the degree to which the recovery of one component or sector would depend on the restoration of another. The key interdependencies that the participants identified include the following:
Information and Communication Technologies: The resilience of this component and the speed with which it recovers are critical to the effectiveness and speed of the emergency response following an earthquake. In particular, emergency operations centers, first responders, and repair crews all rely on these technologies to coordinate their response. This component will also affect the recovery of finance and banking, commerce, and government administration, which rely on this component to facilitate transactions and transfer information.   
Transportation: The successful response and recovery of the majority of components depend on their ability to move people (including emergency responders, repair crews, and inspectors), equipment, food and supplies, fuel, and other essential materials into the areas impacted by the earthquake. The transportation system is likewise necessary for removing debris.   
Electricity: The successful response and recovery of the majority of components depend substantially on the swift restoration of electricity. Even critical facilities can rely on backup power supplies only for short periods and cannot sustain normal functions until the primary power is restored. 
Fuel: Fuel is needed to power backup generators and to run the vehicles that transport emergency responders, inspectors, repair crews, parts, and equipment. Fuel is also needed for aircraft, ferries, and transit busses, and to maintain the operations of many industries.
Domestic Water Supply: Effective fire suppression after the earthquake will depend on the functionality of the domestic water system. A functioning water supply is also essential at critical facilities such as hospitals. The restoration of residential neighborhoods, commercial business, and industrial facilities will likewise depend on the swift recovery of this component. 
Wastewater Systems: The restoration of the wastewater system is as essential as the restoration of the domestic water supply. Widespread damage to these systems may also impact the overall health of the population. 
Finance and Banking: For most components, the ability to carry out financial transactions is essential both during the initial response and as a key part of restoring normal operations. 
Planning and Community Development: The recovery of the majority of components is tied to the speed with which buildings are inspected and permits granted for building and repair. 



	
Supplemental Materials
The following materials can be accessed at the Washington Military Department  website: http://www..wa.gov/about/SeismicSafetyCommittee.shtml
 Resilient Washington State: Workshop Report I 
 Resilient Washington State: Workshop Report II 
 Earthquake scenario fact sheets for the seven fault zones featured in this report (Seattle, southern Whidbey Island, Tacoma, Saddle Mountain, Cle Elum, Walla Walla/Hite, and Cascadia subduction zone)
 Grouping and Ranking of RWS Recommendations Using Collaborative Scenario Planning, a report by the Disaster Risk Reduction students at Western Washington University

Executive Summary
The state of Washington is a region of beautiful landscapes and bountiful natural resources, but the geologic forces that shaped many of these features also give the state one of the highest earthquake hazards in the nation. The potential impacts of this hazard were demonstrated in 2001 by the Nisqually earthquake, which caused hundreds of injuries and inflicted damage serious enough to prompt federal disaster declarations in 24 counties, including six in eastern Washingtonbut this was not the most damaging earthquake we can expect. 
While we cannot prevent earthquakes or know precisely when the next one will strike, we can do a great deal to make sure our communitiesincluding the services and infrastructure on which they dependare prepared to withstand and recover quickly from their damaging effects. It was with this goal in mind that the Washington State Emergency Management Councils Seismic Safety Committee began the Resilient Washington State Initiative. 
The initiative lays the groundwork for improving our states resilience:
This objectivefurther refined by consideration of values such as life safety and human health, property protection, economic security, environmental quality, and community continuityguided the development of the initiatives three main products:
 A general assessment of the current recovery capacity of the states major systems and infrastructure, including estimates of the time it is likely to take for each component to recover following a serious earthquake.
 A target timeframe for each componentthat is, the timeframe within which a given component ought to recover to ensure that the state is resilient.
 The top 10 recommendations for improving statewide resilience. 
This comprehensive assessment revealed many of our states critical vulnerabilities and suggested where our efforts should be focused and sustained over the long term to provide the greatest improvement in life safety and post-earthquake recovery. Implementation of the recommendations will encourage the pre-earthquake planning, mitigation, and enhanced seismic performance of future construction that Washingtons citizens, businesses, and communities need to lower their seismic risk and reduce the time it takes to recover from a significant earthquake. With these investments, we will buy down tomorrows recovery time and enhance public safety for generations to come.
 Identifying Washingtons Vulnerabilities
To determine the current level of Washingtons resilience and identify recovery targets, the subcommittee that headed the initiative solicited participation and gathered input from a wide range of subject-matter experts and stakeholders representing local, state, and federal agencies, university departments, and private businesses. The contributors were organized into four main sector groups: 
 
 CRITICAL SERVICES
 UTILITIES
 TRANSPORTATION
 HOUSING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Through 24 months of collaborative meetings, two all-day workshops, and consensus discussions, each group formulated a table that provides a snapshot of how resilient the sector is today, where its chief vulnerabilities lie, and what factors must be addressed to ensure that when a destructive earthquake occurs, the states recovery is robust and timely. These tables appear on pages 1724 of this report; details of the assessment and sector-specific recommendations appear in Workshop Report II. 
 Preparing a Plan of Action
The work of the sector groups led to the following recommendations. Priority actions support each recommendation by identifying the steps to be taken in the short, mid-, and long term to improve Washingtons resilience over the next 50 years and ensure that communities and businesses are able to respond effectively to a major earthquake, recover quickly, and adapt successfully to the new normal that inevitably follows. The list of recommended organizations to lead and participate in each action is not intended to be all inclusive; the private sector must also be actively engaged. 
Note: All recommendations are valued equally: the order in which they are listed does not reflect relative importance.
RECOMMENDATION 1.  Make schools resilient: structurally, socially, and educationally.
PRIORITY ACTIONS: 
RECOMMENDED ORGANIZATIONS: 
OSPI (lead); DNR
1a. As part of a single statewide project, perform consistent, cost-effective, comprehensive assessments of school buildings to prioritize the seismic risk of the states schools. Apply the new SSC-developed assessment process, which addresses seismic hazard, liquefaction, and structural and non-structural deficiencies. 
Short term: Complete assessments by year 8. Based on the priorities revealed, devise a plan to repair or replace school buildings, beginning with those with the highest level of risk.
Mid- to long term: Repair or replace schools as outlined in the plan. 

1b. Enact legislation that requires school districts to conduct at least one earthquake safety drill per school year. Schools in mapped tsunami hazard zones should conduct a pedestrian evacuation drill annually. Such a law should explicitly require drop, cover, and hold as the states approved earthquake safety technique. 
Short term: Draft and enact legislation.
Long term: Use the existing Great Washington ShakeOut Earthquake Drill registration to track metrics related to progress and participation.
State Legislature (lead); OSPI; 
1c. Enact legislation that requires all school districts to develop mitigation plans, whether on their own or by participating in a city or county mitigation planning process. 
Short term: Districts develop hazard mitigation plans to make them eligible for federal funding (when available) through the Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP).
Long term: Districts maintain hazard mitigation plans by regularly revising and updating them.
State Legislature (lead): School Districts; Cities; Counties; 
1d. Enact legislation that requires all school districts to develop and maintain comprehensive continuity of operations plans, including provisions for mutual aid (e.g. facility-sharing) between districts. 
Short term: School districts develop continuity of operations plans.
Long term: Schools and districts maintain plans through regular training, updates, and exercises. 
OSPI (lead);
State Legislature; School Districts

RECOMMENDATION 2.  Require that utility providers (domestic water supply, wastewater, electricity, natural gas, petroleum, and information and communication technology) identify the vulnerabilities in their systems and mitigate the deficiencies.
PRIORITY ACTIONS: 
RECOMMENDED ORGANIZATIONS: 

2a. Maintain a state lifelines working group under the Washington State Emergency Management Council to facilitate improved coordination, planning, and response among public and private sector lifeline operators.

2b. Develop and adopt model statewide codes for design performance standards for each utility type. Examine incentives for replacement programs that eliminate non-ductile (rigid) pipelines and replace them with ductile (flexible) alternatives that are less susceptible to breakage in seismic events.
UTC with ASCE (lead); State Building Codes Council
2c. Request that the Northwest Power and Conservation Council examine the feasibility of establishing an interoperable power network (including interoperable parts) within Washington and throughout the Pacific Northwest and/or western United States.
Office of the Governor, State Legislature, NWPC
2d. Codify a framework for identifying and communicating which essential facilities will have priority for restoration of utility service following an earthquake. Such a framework will provide greater certainty during the response and recovery phases for critical facilities, etc.
Proposed lifelines working group (lead); State Legislature
2e. Expand existing requirements regarding facilities that must have backup generators to include any facility that is critical to response and recovery operations. Connection to two different electrical substations alone should not satisfy these new requirements.
State Legislature
2f. Conduct an analysis of the potential economic losses associated with power outages that may result from a variety of earthquake scenarios. (This is to help implement Recommendations 2d and 2e.)
Dept. of Commerce

RECOMMENDATION 3.  Improve the resilience of buildings in areas of high seismic hazard to improve life safety and increase the number of people who will be able to shelter in place.
PRIORITY ACTIONS: 
RECOMMENDED ORGANIZATIONS: 
Dept. of Commerce
3a. Compile a detailed inventory of the actual building stock (types of buildings and structural systems, dates of construction, and seismic retrofits) in all jurisdictions across the state.

3b. Mandate that seismic evaluations be completed as part of real estate transactions in order to ensure full disclosure of a propertys condition between buyers and sellers.
Short term: Establish a working group with key stakeholders, including real estate, insurance, and financial professionals, to examine potential funding mechanisms and define an approach and requirements. Initiate a demonstration project within a county or region. 
Long term: Evaluate the efficacy of the demonstration project and, if such an approach is determined to be feasible, expand on a statewide basis.
Office of the Governor, 
State Legislature
3c. Provide model code language for adoption by local jurisdictions in order to ensure that unsafe buildings do not kill or injure occupants. This should include mandatory parapet retrofit (or removal); examining the City of Seattles Unreinforced Masonry (URM) building retrofit ordinance; and working with stakeholders to identify federal, state, and local incentives to promote adoption and action (e.g. retrofitting).
Dept. of CommerceGMS; State Building Codes Council
3d. Institute a rapid, consistent, and comprehensive fast-tagging building assessment program that may be used in all local jurisdictions. 
Short term: Form a task group to further define the concept of shelter in place (i.e., allowing residents to stay in their own homes while they are being repaired) after a major earthquake and determine how best to facilitate implementation at a community level. The task group should also: 
* Adopt a program similar to San Franciscos Building Occupancy Resumption Program (BORP).  
* Recommend adjustments to the permitting process to make it possible for people to stay in their homes with access to temporary sewage and water services.
DSHS; DES; ; SEAW; WABO
3f. Create a task force to identify possible strategies for development of a state-managed earthquake insurance program similar to the California Earthquake Authority or more effectively promote privately-offered earthquake insurance to increase coverage throughout the state and reduce direct losses to individuals and families.
Office of the Insurance Commissioner

RECOMMENDATION 4.  Assess the permitting requirements that relate to environmental protection and mitigation to determine how best to make environmental planning mesh with seismic mitigation and recovery planning.
PRIORITY ACTIONS: 
RECOMMENDED ORGANIZATIONS: 
Ecology;  (EMC); Governors Office of Regulatory Assistance; DNR; WDFW
4a. Complete a comprehensive review of the states permitting rules and regulations and create an inventory of those that may pose challenges during the recovery phase. Create a process for developing potential alternative solutions that would better fit a recovery situation, making sure that the need to expedite permits is balanced with the need to ensure the quality and safety of repairs and the protection of the environment. Communicate the results (the status of rules and regulations after an earthquake) to local jurisdictions and relevant industries.

4b. Require communities planning under the Washington State Growth Management Act to consider the post-earthquake disaster landscape as part of the comprehensive planning process. Amending the Growth Management Act to include this concept would provide communities with an opportunity to more closely dovetail hazard mitigation planning and land use planning with the aim of reducing risk and promoting a rapid recovery.


RECOMMENDATION 5.  Strengthen business continuity planning efforts.
PRIORITY ACTIONS: 
RECOMMENDED ORGANIZATIONS: 
; Dept. of Commerce
5a. Provide education, tools, and training to help businesses develop continuity plans or analyze existing plans, giving particular consideration to their supply chains and issues related to just-in-time inventories.


RECOMMENDATION 6.  Strengthen regional transportation networks.
PRIORITY ACTIONS: 
RECOMMENDED ORGANIZATIONS: 
WSDOT
6a. Further define critical state routes into and out of ports, airports, and other key areas (e.g. the Kent/Duwamish Valley) and identify priority routes for retrofitting/hardening as a systematic approach that includes 6b. Decisions about these routes should be made in consultation with all necessary administrative levels/jurisdictions.

6b. Facilitate collaboration between state and local jurisdictions to identify regional lifeline routes and prioritize retrofitting of city and county roads and bridges. Incorporate this into the Transportation Improvement Program.
WSDOT; 
Regional & Metropolitan Transportation Planning Organizations
6c. Develop interagency agreements between WSDOT and local jurisdictions to facilitate the rerouting of traffic following an earthquake.

6d. Require that transit agencies (both large and small) develop robust continuity of operations plans.
State Legislature

RECOMMENDATION 7.  Make hospitals resilientstructurally and functionally.
PRIORITY ACTIONS: 
RECOMMENDED ORGANIZATIONS: 
Dept. of Health;
State Legislature
7a. Retrofit hospitals and assess and address the vulnerabilities of their supply chains to ensure that they are able not only to withstand the expected earthquake, but to remain operational afterwards.
Short term: Establish a task force to review Californias Office of Statewide Heath Planning and Development requirements regarding mandatory retrofitting of existing hospital facilities. This task force should identify and adapt for use in Washington a set of regulations that define the necessary level of building performance for hospitals and require hospitals to retrofit within a specified timeframe in order to achieve that level of performance.

7b. Require that the non-structural elements of hospital buildings be addressed in design requirements: Further define this in the current building code; develop and implement a means of enforcement; and provide opportunities for training.
Building Codes Council
7c. Strengthen seismic requirements and oversight for design and construction/upgrades of hospital facilities and regional medical centers that serve similar functions.

7d. Require analysis of supply chains of pharmaceuticals and other essential commodities to identify weak links in the health care system and enable health-care providers to develop viable alternatives.
Dept. of Health

RECOMMENDATION 8.  Identify and map in greater detail sources of seismicity and geologically hazardous areas and develop plans for mitigation of identified hazards.
PRIORITY ACTIONS: 
RECOMMENDED ORGANIZATIONS: 
DNR; PNSN
8a. Continue to enhance knowledge of seismic sources impacting the State of Washington through mapping, research, field investigation, and seismic monitoring.

8b. Prioritize areas for detailed liquefaction and other seismic hazard mapping and accelerate the mapping. 
Short term: Develop a more comprehensive and detailed statewide assessment of liquefaction-prone areas:  Prioritize areas where liquefaction is likely to have the highest impact; begin assessment around critical facilities; and do detailed studies of areas that are already of interest based on current mapping.
Mid-term: Reference the updated liquefaction hazard maps in building codes and establish a consistent means of communicating maps and related information to local jurisdictions for use as best-available-science under the Growth Management Act.
DNR
8c. Work with the planning and public works departments within local jurisdictions and tribes to develop a model ordinance of mitigation measures and an explanation of how it can be used.  
DNR; Dept. of  CommerceGMS

RECOMMENDATION 9.  Improve life safety in coastal communities at risk of local tsunamis.
PRIORITY ACTIONS: 
RECOMMENDED ORGANIZATIONS: 

9a. Implement tsunami vertical evacuation plans developed by local and tribal jurisdictions through Project Safe Haven to minimize loss of life during local tsunamis. 
Short term: Support one or more local jurisdiction demonstration projects in order to determine the most cost-effective approach and identify funding options that may be instituted on a regional or statewide basis.


RECOMMENDATION 10.  Implement resilience principles through formalized accountability.
PRIORITY ACTIONS: 
RECOMMENDED ORGANIZATIONS: 
Office of the Governor, State Legislature, Commissioner of Public Lands, Superintendent of Public Instruction, OFM
 10a. Adopt the recommendations of the Resilient Washington State Initiative into Washington State Priorities of Government (POG) and the Governors Management and Accountability Program (GMAP)

10b. Identify annualized cost of implementation and continually examine opportunities for funding mechanisms related to the Resilient Washington State Initiative.


ABBREVIATIONS
ASCE: American Society of Civil Engineers
OFM: Office of Financial Management
DES: Washington State Department of Enterprise Services
OSPI: Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction
DNR: Washington State Department of Natural Resources
PNSN: Pacific Northwest Seismic Network
DSHS: Washington State Department of Social and Health Services
SEAW: Structural Engineers Association of Washington
Ecology: Washington State Department of Ecology
SSC: Washington State Seismic Safety Committee
EMC: Emergency Management Council
UTC: Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission
: Washington Military Department, 
WABO: Washington Association of Building Officials
GMS: Growth Management Services
WDFW: Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife
NWPC: Northwest Power and Conservation Council
WSDOT: Washington State Department of Transportation



Introduction
News coverage of recent devastating earthquakes in New Zealand and Japan has captured public attention worldwide and ensured that we are all aware of the destruction and loss of life that earthquakes and tsunamis can cause. For the people of Washington, such events also serve as reminders of the dangers lurking beneath our own feet. Research over the past few decades has shown that our states earthquake hazard is greater than previously suspected. While this is especially true of the western half of the state, many areas east of the Cascade Mountains are also at risk. In a recent study of annualized earthquake losses, FEMA ranked the state of Washington second only to California for highest earthquake risk (FEMA 366/April 2008).
Moreover, because all regions of Washington are interconnectedeconomically, socially, and even physically through shared systems and resourcesa destructive earthquake in one part of the state can have serious and long-lasting consequences for the others. 
Washingtons earthquake hazard is defined by the regions geology. We can seek to understand it better, but we cannot alter it. Fortunately, it is possible to reduce the risk that earthquakes pose to the people who live here. To do this, we must identify the vulnerabilities of our states systems and infrastructure and implement policies that ensure that we are as prepared and as resilient as possible. 
The Resilient Washington State Initiative 
This report is the culmination of the Resilient Washington State Initiative, which was launched by the Washington State Seismic Safety Committee (SSC) in the spring of 2010. The initiative was spearheaded by the SSCs Resilient Washington State Subcommittee. Its purpose was to create a framework for improving Washingtons resilience when earthquakes occur by proactively reducing critical vulnerabilities before the next damaging event. The framework includes recommendations for legislation and other measures that will encourage pre-earthquake planning, mitigation, and enhanced seismic performance of future construction to lower seismic risk and significantly reduce the amount of time it takes to recover from a moderate to large earthquake. The framework is intended to facilitate long-term implementation of seismic risk reduction policies and activities across the state with the goal of making the state resilient within a 50-year timeframe. 
Process and Methodology
For initial inspiration, the Resilient Washington State (RWS) Subcommittee looked to a similar effort undertaken for the City of San Francisco by the San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association (SPUR). Unlike the SPUR project, which focused on a single city, the RWS effort addressed statewide impacts. It is the first initiative of its kind in the United States. 
 What is a Resilient State?
The Resilient Washington State Subcommittee began by surveying the existing literature to find a definition of resilience that could be used to give direction to the project. Because none of the existing definitions seemed to suit the initiatives scope, the subcommittee formulated a definition that can be applied to the state as a whole: 
The subcommittee also articulated a set of equally weighted values to help guide the process of identifying the states recovery targets. These values (in no particular order) are: 
 Life Safety and Human Health: Residents of the state of Washington should not suffer life-threatening injuries from earthquake-induced damage or develop serious illness from lack of emergency medical care after an earthquake. This includes enforcing and updating building codes, eliminating non-structural hazards, and ensuring continuity of emergency health care.
 Property Protection: Public and private property within the state of Washington should be built, retrofitted, or rebuilt to minimize earthquake-induced damage. This includes proper design and construction of both structural and non-structural elements.
 Economic Security: Residents and businesses within the state of Washington should have access to income opportunities to meet basic needs before and soon after an earthquake. This includes sufficient employment opportunities, market access, distribution capacity, and supplier access.
 Environmental Quality: The natural resources and ecosystems of Washington State should be managed in such a way as to minimize earthquake-induced damage. This includes the use of proper growth management, accident response capacity, and industrial safety measures. 
 Community Continuity: All communities within the state of Washington should have the capacity to maintain their social networks and livelihoods after an earthquake disaster. This includes prevention of social-network disruption, social discrimination, and community bias.
 Assessing Washingtons Resilience 
For organizational purposes, the states systems and infrastructure were divided into four sectors: Critical Services, Transportation, Utilities, and Housing and Economic Development. These sectors were further subdivided into their primary components (see Figure 1). This organization provided the basic structure for all discussions about and assessments of Washingtons capacity to recover from an earthquake.
To ensure a full and balanced evaluation of Washingtons infrastructure, the RWS Subcommittee solicited input from a wide range of experts and stakeholders from across the state and from all four sectors. The participants in this project included representatives from local, state, and federal agencies, university departments, and private industry (see the list of participants in the appendices).    
The subcommittee began gathering this input at a one-day Resilient Washington State Workshop on September 17, 2010 at the University of Washington. Invitations were sent to stakeholders and experts throughout the state. Forty-five people attended and participated in discussions that further refined the values and shaped the way the sectors and components were defined.
Following this workshop, groups of stakeholders and experts were asked to examine the capacity and resilience of the sectors in more detail. Four groups were formed, one for each of the sectors. These sector groups, which included many of the people who had attended the first workshop, met in the spring and summer of 2011 to review and assess the primary components of each sector. Each group was co-chaired by at least one member of the subcommittee and a volunteer from among the participants. 
The members of the sector groups used their collective expertise to: 
 Evaluate the current condition of the states systems and infrastructure to predict how they will perform in an earthquake and how quickly they can be restored if disrupted or damaged.
 Develop targets for the desired levels of performance.
 Develop target timeframes for the restoration of services and functions following an earthquake.
 Define the vulnerabilities and key interdependencies of each sector. (For example, when considered alone, water might be restored within a day, but its vulnerability is that it depends on electricity, which could take longer than a day.)
 Prepare recommendations for statewide action to achieve desired targets. 
At the concluding Resilient Washington State Workshop on December 2, 2011, the co-chairs of the sector groups presented the results of each groups efforts. The experts and stakeholders who participated in the final workshop then took part in breakout sessions. These sessions allowed them to review and in some cases revise the assessments, giving particular attention to the ways in which the interdependencies of the sectors and components might impact and alter the timeframes required for recovery. 
The second workshop report contains each groups estimated recovery timeframes and recommended targets, along with a summary of the variables that the groups considered most likely to affect the length of time it takes for each component to recover. The workshop report also provides sector-specific recommendations for shortening recovery timeframes and improving resilience. 
 Developing Statewide Recommendations from the Results
The final step was to assemble the recommendations that the work groups had prepared for each sector and derive from them a set of recommendations that, if implemented, would lower risk, speed recovery, and have the greatest impact on the resilience of the state as a whole. To help with the initial evaluation, the RWS Subcommittee invited Disaster Risk Reduction students at Western Washington University to arrange and rank all of the recommendations submitted by the sector groups. To do this, the students applied a collaborative scenario planning process (for their report, see the Supplemental Materials list on page ii). Their grouping and ranking of the sector groups recommendations provided a useful framework for discussing and synthesizing the results of the initiative. From this, the RWS Subcommittee and Seismic Safety Committee articulated state-level recommendations and priority actions.  
The results of the Resilient Washington State process are summarized in the tables, notes, and recommendations provided in this report and its appendices. They are intended to serve as tools for shaping the direction of earthquake planning, mitigation, and response, as well as the further development of policies that will improve statewide resilience.
Defining the Earthquake Hazard
Before we can develop and implement policies that will improve Washingtons resilience, we must first define the hazard. In essence, this means we must characterize the earthquake that we expect and anticipate the results of the shaking. 
In a state the size of Washington, no single earthquake scenario can be used to define the hazard and level of risk for every region and every community in the state. In order to define resilience at a statewide level and develop mitigation policies to achieve it, the Resilient Washington State (RWS) Subcommittee chose to adopt a two-pronged approach to the expected earthquake ground motions. 
First, the subcommittee considered a number of scenario earthquakes that were developed in 2009 by the , Washington State Department of Natural Resources, United States Geological Survey, and Federal Emergency Management Agency, for use in this and other planning efforts. Those who contributed their expertise to the Resilient Washington State Initiative were asked to refer to seven of these scenarios. This was to help them comprehend the geographic area of impact of a single earthquake with regional or statewide consequences. Although each of these earthquake scenarios represents a single seismic eventand some events may occur more frequently than othersthe scenarios are consistent with the National Seismic Hazard Maps created by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). 
Second, participating experts and stakeholders were asked to consider the 2008 USGS Seismic Hazard Map of Washington (see Figure 2). This map illustrates the average level of shaking expected from all known sources of earthquakes affecting the region. The results are portrayed in probabilistic terms: The various colors indicate the level of shaking that seismologists anticipate (with 10 percent probability) will occur in that area within the next 50 years.   
Collectively, the earthquake scenarios and the PGA hazard map illustrate the type and level of earthquake hazard for which the state must be prepared if it is to be resilient.

Overview of Earthquake Scenarios
LOCATION & MAGNITUDE OF SIX SHALLOW 
SCENARIO EARTHQUAKES:
SOME POTENTIAL EFFECTS: 
Seattle fault zone
Magnitude 7.0

Although western Washington would experience the greatest shaking intensities, eastern Washington and Alaska will be affected by the economic disruption that results from damage to port facilities in and around Seattle. 
Southern Whidbey Island fault zone
Magnitude 7.4
Such an earthquake would not only affect northern Puget Sound, including the cities of Seattle, Everett, and Port Townsend, but also Vancouver Island, British Columbia.
Tacoma fault
Magnitude 7.1
This earthquake would cause severe damage to the communities of southern Puget Sound. It might also create a tsunami in Puget Sound itself. Within about five minutes of the earthquake, this tsunami would cause flooding in the Puyallup River delta.    
Saddle Mountain fault
Magnitude 7.4
This event would impact at least ten counties in Washington, with the most significant effects in Grant County, followed by Yakima, Kittitas, Benton, and Franklin. The U.S. Department of Energys Hanford Site is within the area likely to experience strong shaking.
Cle Elum fault 
Magnitude 6.8
Although the communities within Kittitas and Yakima counties would experience the strongest shaking and sustain the greatest damage, surrounding counties, such as King and Pierce, would also be affected. 
Hite fault
Magnitude 6.8
Like the earthquakes in the Saddle Mountain and Cle Elum scenarios, this earthquake could disrupt the transmission of electricity as well as traffic along the Columbia River.
The earthquakes described in the following scenarios are expected to have serious repercussions for the state as a whole, not just the areas physically damaged by the ground shaking. (Fact sheets for each scenario can be accessed at http://www..wa.gov/about/SeismicSafetyCommittee.shtml.) The first six are shallow or crustal earthquakes; the seventh is an interplate earthquake on the Cascadia subduction zone.   
 Cascadia Subduction Zone Scenario
The Cascadia subduction zone off Washingtons coastline is 684 miles (1,100 kilometers) long, extending from Brooks Peninsula on Vancouver Island to Cape Mendocino in California. It is capable of producing earthquakes on the order of magnitude 9.0. Such an earthquake would be comparable to Japans great Tohoku earthquake and tsunami in March of 2011. 
Because large segments of the fault may slip during a subduction zone earthquake, the shaking is expected to impact all of western Washington and cause the most widespread damage of any scenario. The entire subduction zone could rupture from end to end in a single event. Although the maximum intensity of ground shaking would be less than for a large shallow earthquake, a subduction zone earthquake would cause strong shaking over a much larger areafrom northern California to northern Vancouver Island. The shaking is also expected to continue for 23 minutes, causing extensive liquefaction in river valleys and along waterfronts. Like the earthquake that struck off the coast of Japan, a Cascadia subduction zone earthquake would also trigger a tsunami, which will cause further devastation as it impacts the coastline and travels inland for several miles. 
Anticipating the Effects of an Earthquake 
The nature and degree of damage caused by an earthquake will depend on the earthquake scenario and local conditions. In general, we can expect damage and disruption as a result of: 
Strong ground shaking: This may seriously damage buildings and their contents, bridges, roads, utilities, and other critical systems and facilities. 
Liquefaction: This occurs when the shaking causes water-saturated loose soils (such as silt and sand) to behave like a liquid. Liquefaction tends to happen along natural waterways, such as rivers, and in areas where the ground consists of artificial fill. Port facilities and bridges may therefore be especially vulnerable, but commercial buildings located along rivers, inlets, and bays are also at risk. Buildings on such soils can sink and topple, and foundations may lose strength, resulting in severe damage or structural collapse. Pipes and tanks buried in liquefied soils will float upwards to the surface. 
Landslides: Landslides, which may continue to occur for several days after the shaking stops, are especially likely if the earthquake happens during the wet season (winter and spring). 
Tsunami: A subduction zone earthquake, such as the one described above in the Cascadia scenario, will generate a large tsunami. The waves will begin to flood the coast within 30 minutes of the earthquake, causing severe damage to ports, harbors, communities, transportation corridors, and utilities systems for several miles inland. A more localized tsunami in Puget Sound is also possible following a shallow earthquake, but this will depend on the faults location and other details of the earthquake (see, for example, the Tacoma fault scenario). Localized tsunamis can also be triggered by earthquake-induced landslides.  
Current efforts to address Washingtons tsunami risk are focused on preparedness to improve life safety within vulnerable areas. This includes the implementation of warning systems, identification and posting of evacuation routes, and training and education for local residents and businesses. Areas that do not have high ground above the projected zone of tsunami flooding will require vertical evacuation sheltersthese make it possible for the population to reach man-made high ground in a short amount of time. Project Safe Haven (www.facebook.com/projectsafehaven) allows coastal communities to participate in the planning and design of the evacuation structures to ensure that they meet local needs. 
Secondary hazards caused by the earthquake: The damage that results from an earthquake may create additional hazards, including fires and natural gas leaks, hazardous material spills, and downed or damaged electrical lines. 
Our resilience depends on how well we anticipate and prepare for the effects of a major earthquake. Because Washingtons systems, infrastructure, and economy are interconnected, improving our resilience requires a coordinated effort among stakeholders from all sectors and locations, even those that may not experience direct physical damage during an earthquake. The first step, as the following section shows, is to identify our current level of resilience and pinpoint our most serious vulnerabilities.


The Danger to Washingtons Ports
Washingtons ports are crucial to the regions economy: 8% of U.S. exports and 6% of imports pass through our seaports. Together, Seattle and Tacoma make up the third largest container port complex in the nation. In 2010, they had a combined total vessel trade of over $70.6 billion. 
Seattle now ranks 7th of 50 among North American ports, while the Port of Everett boasts the largest marina on the West Coast. Three of the states 11 deep draft ports are located on the Columbia River, which serves as a transportation corridor for over 40 million tons of cargo each year.
Ports are especially vulnerable to earthquakes: Their waterfront facilities are typically built on fill or sediments that are prone to liquefaction. Ports on Washingtons Pacific coast and in Puget Sound are also exposed to the tsunami hazard.
The top photo shows damage from lateral spreading at the Port of Coronel in Chile after a magnitude 8.8 earthquake in February 2010. At least four large sink holes also developed at this port in the days following the earthquake. The bottom photo shows an example of the damage that resulted from ground failure all around Osaka Bay during the magnitude 6.9 earthquake that severely damaged the port facilities of Kobe, Japan, in January of 1995. 

  

Evaluating Washingtons Infrastructure 
Four workgroups were assigned the task of assessing the key sectors of Washingtons infrastructure. They evaluated the components that make up each sector and considered how these components are likely to perform during and recover after an earthquake. From this evaluation, they developed a general sense of the states current capacity for recovery and identified the targets that we must meet if we are to achieve Washingtons resilience goals.
Critical Services Sector
The following table summarizes the estimated timeframes for recovery of the components of Washingtons Critical Services sector. The Xs mark the groups collective opinion, based on existing data and expert judgment, as to how long the response and recovery of each component is likely to take if a scenario earthquake happened today. The colored areas indicate the targets that are necessary to ensure that Washington is resilient. Gaps between the Xs and colored areas reveal the need for further evaluation, policies, and actions to improve the states resilience.
KEY TO THE TABLE
TARGET TIMEFRAME FOR RECOVERY:

Operational (time it ought to take to restore the component to 8090% operational):

TIME NEEDED FOR RECOVERY TO 8090% OPERATIONAL GIVEN CURRENT CONDITIONS:

For a number of components, the timeframes marked in the table reflect the estimated recovery period following a worst case scenario earthquake. 


TARGET STATES OF RECOVERY: WASHINGTONS CRITICAL SERVICES SECTOR  

Event occurs
024 hours
13 days
37 days
1 week
1 month
13 months
3 months
1 year
13 years
3 + years
Law enforcement

          







Emergency response

          







Health and medical care

          







Education

          







Mass care 

          







Social services

          







Food network

          







Government administration









Workshop Report II contains detailed examples of the variables that are likely to affect the actual timeframe of each components response and recovery; it also contains sector-specific recommendations for improving resilience. (For a copy of Workshop Report II, see the Supplemental Materials listed on page ii above.)

DESCRIPTIONS OF COMPONENTS OF THE CRITICAL SERVICES SECTOR

ESTIMATED TIMEFRAME FOR RESPONSE & RECOVERY
Law enforcement in this context refers to the emergency response and regular policing duties of local and state law enforcement agencies. 

 Target: 37 days
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 37 days
Emergency response encompasses all first responders, including urban search-and-rescue teams, fire fighters, and emergency medical technicians (EMTs). It also includes emergency operations centers (EOCs) and critical response systems, non-profit aid organizations (such as the American Red Cross), emergency morgue facilities, and Hazmat crews. 

 Target: 13 days
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 37 days
These estimates apply to a fully engaged response; many aspects of the response will be initiated within the first 24 hours.
Health and medical care refers to the normal servicesincluding elective proceduresprovided by Washingtons hospitals, medical clinics, and other health care facilities. (Emergency care right after an earthquake is part of the emergency response component.)

 Target: 1 weekmonth
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 3 months year
Education refers to Washingtons public and private school systems (kindergarten through grade 12), including buildings, curricula, and social aspects. 

 Target: 1 weekmonth
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 3 months year (buildings in 13 years; curriculum in 3 months year; social aspects in 1 month)  
Mass care is part of the emergency response following a disaster and involves the distribution of emergency supplies and resources (clothing, shelter, food, and water) to those in need. Some providers of mass care also seek to reconnect people to whatever social services they used before the disaster. Providers may include both nonprofit organizations, such as the Red Cross, and governmental agencies.

 Target: 37 days for a major Cascadia subduction zone event with widespread damage; 13 days for a more localized event
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 1 week month
Social services are overseen by the Department of Social and Health Services (DSHS) and include regular assistance with food, mental and physical health care, childcare, and treatment for addictions, as well as help for victims of abuse. The people of Washington must rely increasingly on non-profit aid organizations for delivery of social services. 

 Target: 1 weekmonth
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 13 months
A large-scale earthquake is likely to result in substantial temporary degradation of the level of service.
Food network refers to the normal system by which food is stored, distributed, and sold to consumers. The network is operated by the private sector and includes nationally, regionally, and locally owned grocery stores and warehouses.

 Target: 1 week month
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 1 week month
Government administration includes elected officials and staff (local and state) and both emergency operations and regular administrative functions. The facets of this component include representation, finance, policy development, executive decision making, and services (such as issuing licenses and permits). 

 Target: 37 days
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 1 week month
Utilities Sector
The following table summarizes the estimated timeframes for recovery of the components of Washingtons Utilities sector. The letters (L, NL, and X) mark the groups collective opinion, based on existing data and expert judgment, as to how long the response and recovery of each component is likely to take if a scenario earthquake happened today. The colored areas indicate the targets that are necessary to ensure that Washington is resilient. Gaps between the letters and the colored areas reveal the need for further evaluation, policies, and actions to improve the states resilience.
This work group preferred to show how the variability of earthquake damageespecially damage associated with liquefactionmay affect the recovery potential of existing, permanent utilities systems. (By implementing temporary solutions, utilities providers may be able to restore services to many end users before the permanent systems are fully repaired.) 
KEY TO THE TABLE
TARGET TIMEFRAME FOR RECOVERY:

Operational (time it ought to take to restore component to 8090% operational):

TIME NEEDED FOR RECOVERY TO 8090% OPERATIONAL GIVEN CURRENT CONDITIONS:

TIME NEEDED FOR RECOVERY TO 8090% OPERATIONAL IN LIQUEFACTION ZONES GIVEN CURRENT CONDITIONS:
L
TIME NEEDED FOR RECOVERY TO 8090% OPERATIONAL IN NON-LIQUEFACTION ZONES GIVEN CURRENT CONDITIONS:
NL

TARGET STATES OF RECOVERY: WASHINGTONS UTILITIES SECTOR  

Event occurs
024 hours
13 days
37 days
1 week month
13 months
3 months 1 year
13 years
3+ years
Domestic water supply









    Supply & transmission pipes    



NL


L


    Distribution pipes




NL

L


Wastewater systems









    Treatment facilities





NL
L


    Sewer pipes





NL

L

Flood control









    Dams









    Levees









Electricity









    Transmission









    Distribution, 60% restored









    Distribution, 70% restored









    Distribution, >70% restored









Natural Gas 









    Transmission


NL

L




    Distribution, 40% restored









    Distribution, 90% restored









Petroleum









    Refineries & transmission









    Distribution









Information and communication technology









Workshop Report II contains detailed examples of the variables that are likely to affect the actual timeframe of each components response and recovery; it also contains sector-specific recommendations for improving resilience. (For a copy of Workshop Report II, see the Supplemental Materials listed on page ii above.)
DESCRIPTIONS OF COMPONENTS OF THE UTILITIES SECTOR

ESTIMATED TIMEFRAME FOR RESPONSE & RECOVERY
Domestic water supply consists of reservoirs, storage facilities, treatment facilities, pump stations, and transmission and distribution pipelines for household, business, and emergency services use. It does not include pipelines and hookups on customers private property: these must be repaired by the property owner.

 Target: 13 days 
 Timeframes based on current capacity: 
 Supply & transmission pipes: 37 days in zones of no liquefaction; 3 months year in liquefaction zones
 Distribution pipes: 1 weekmonth in zones of no liquefaction; 3 months year in liquefaction zones
Wastewater systems consist of sewer and stormwater systems, including wastewater pump stations, transmission and distribution pipelines, catch basins, and wastewater treatment facilities. This component does not include pipelines and hookups on customers private property: these must be repaired by the property owner.

 Target: 1 weekmonth  
 Timeframes based on current capacity: 
 Treatment facilities: 13 months in zones of no liquefaction; 3 months year in liquefaction zones
 Sewer pipes: 13 months in zones of no liquefaction; 13 years in liquefaction zones
Flood control consists of the dams, levees (including both manmade and natural river banks), and other structures that reduce the likelihood of impacts from flooding.   

 Target: 1 week month
 Timeframes based on current capacity: 
 Dams: 13 months
 Levees: 13 years
Electricity consists of generation facilities, substations, transmission towers, transmission lines and equipment, distribution poles and equipment, and control centers. It does not include hookups on customers private property: these must be repaired by the property owner (private residences and facilities will likely require inspection before service can be restored).

 Target: 1 week month
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 
 Transmission: 13 years
 Distribution: 60% restored in 1 week month; 70% restored in 13 months; greater than 70% restored in 3 months year
Estimates reflect the time needed to restore the electrical grid/system. Damage to residences and industrial and commercial buildings must also be repaired and inspected before these structures can be reconnected to the grid. In some cases, this could take longer than six months.
Natural gas includes natural gas transmission pipelines and facilities as well as their owners and operators. It does not include pipelines and hookups on customers private property: these must be repaired by the property owner.

 Targets: Transmission in 13 days; distribution in 1 week month
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 
 Transmission: 13 days in zones of no liquefaction; 1 week month in liquefaction zones
 Distribution: 40% restored in 1 week month; 90% restored in 13 months
Petroleum includes transmission pipelines for petroleum (gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, crude oil), terminals and refineries, and their owners and operators. It does not include pipelines and hookups on customers private property: these must be repaired by the owners of the property.

 Targets: Refineries & transmission in 1 week month; distribution in 37 days
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 
 Refineries & transmission: 13 years
 Distribution: 13 months
Information & communication technology includes hard-wired telephone and cable TV systems, wireless cellular phone systems, and 800 MHZ public service radio systems. Most services are provided by privately owned companies. The 800 MHZ, used primarily by police, fire, and emergency medical response agencies, is publicly owned and controlled.

 Target: 37 days
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 13 months

Transportation Sector
The following table summarizes the estimated timeframes for recovery of the components of Washingtons Transportation sector. The Xs mark the groups collective opinion, based on existing data and expert judgment, as to how long the response and recovery of each component is likely to take if a scenario earthquake happened today. The colored areas indicate the targets that are necessary to ensure that Washington is resilient. Gaps between the Xs and colored areas reveal the need for further evaluation, policies, and actions to improve the states resilience.
This work group preferred to show how the recovery of the states transportation system can be expected to occur in stages as the restoration work proceeds through a list of priorities and advances from temporary to more permanent repairs and solutions. 
KEY TO THE TABLE
TARGETS TO ACHIEVE DIFFERENT LEVELS OF RECOVERY:

Minimal (A minimum level of service is restored, primarily for the use of emergency responders, repair crews, and vehicles transporting food and other critical supplies.)


Functional (Service is not yet restored to full capacity, but is sufficient to get the economy moving againe.g. some truck/freight traffic can be accommodated. There may be fewer lanes in use, some weight restrictions, and lower speed limits.)


Operational (Restoration is up to 8090% of capacity: A full level of service has been restored and is sufficient to allow people to commute to school and to work.) 

TIME NEEDED FOR RECOVERY TO 8090% OPERATIONAL GIVEN CURRENT CONDITIONS:

For a number of components, the timeframes marked in the table reflect the estimated recovery period following a worst case scenario earthquake. See the notes in Workshop Report II for details. 


TARGET STATES OF RECOVERY: WASHINGTONS TRANSPORTATION SECTOR  

Event occurs
024 hours
13 days
37 days
1 week
1 month
13 months
3 months
1 year
13 years
3+ years
Interstate 5









     Puget Sound (center & north) 









     South end (Chehalis south)









Interstate 90     









     Puget Sound (Snoqualmie  Pass
     west) 









     Cascades to eastern WA
     (Snoqualmie to Idaho)









Interstate 405









     South end (Tukwila to I-90)









     North end (I-90 to Lynnwood)









Ferry operations









Floating Bridges









     SR 520









     I-90









     Hood Canal 










TARGET STATES OF RECOVERY: WASHINGTONS TRANSPORTATION SECTOR  (CONTINUED)

Event occurs
024 hours
13 days
37 days
1 week    1 month
1 3 months
3 months   1 year
1 3 years
3+ years
25% of major & minor arterials









50% of major & minor arterials









75% of major & minor arterials









90% of major & minor arterials









Airports









Airport for emergency traffic









Ports and navigable waterways









Rail (freight & passenger)









Mass transit: estimates mirror those of  major & minor arterials
Workshop Report II contains detailed examples of the variables that are likely to affect the actual timeframe of each components response and recovery; it also contains sector-specific recommendations for improving resilience. (For a copy of Workshop Report II, see the Supplemental Materials listed on page ii above.)
DESCRIPTIONS OF COMPONENTS OF THE TRANSPORTATION SECTOR

ESTIMATED TIMEFRAME FOR RESPONSE & RECOVERY
Interstates and floating bridges include Interstates 5, 90, and 405 and floating bridges SR 520, I-90, and Hood Canal. 

 Target: between 13 days and 13 months, depending on location
 Timeframe based on current capacity: between 3 months year and 13 years, depending on location
Ferry operations consist of the fleet of 22 ferries and 20 terminals that the Washington State Department of Transportation operates in Puget Sound for the use of commuters, tourists, and commercial vehicles. 

 Target: between 024 hours and 1week month
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 3 months year
Major and minor arterials encompass arterial roadways (including bridges, state highways, and many city and county roads) other than the interstates. 

 Target: between 024 hours and 3 months year, depending on location
 Timeframe based on current capacity: between 1 week month and 13 years, depending on location
The percentage of roadways that are open for use will increase over this period.
Airports include international and regional airports, such as Seattle-Tacoma (Sea-Tac) International Airport, Boeing Field (King County International Airport), and Paine Field (Snohomish County Airport). 

 Target: between 024 hours and 1week month
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 3 months year
Ports and navigable waterways consist of Washington system of ports and shipping routes, including piers, wharves, seawalls, container storage yards, marinas, and other facilities and equipment on which the operations of the ports depend. 

 Target: between 37 days and 13 months
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 13 years

Rail includes passenger rail services and the freight services provided by numerous privately owned railroad companies, along with the tracks, bridges, overpasses, signal systems, and other facilities and equipment on which they depend.

 Target: between 37 days and 13 months
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 13 years
(While light rail is part of the Mass Transit system, for the purposes of this initiative, it is also addressed as part of the Rail component.)
Mass transit includes all public transportation systems other than the ferry system. Because these systemsand public buses in particulardepend on the functionality of roadways and bridges, the recovery of mass transit will depend predominately on the recovery of the network of major and minor arterials along which mass transit routes run.

 Target: between 024 hours and 3 months year, depending on location
 Timeframe based on current capacity: between 1 week month and 13 years, depending on location
The percentage of roadways that are open for use will increase over this period.





Housing and Economic Development Sector
The following table summarizes the estimated timeframes for recovery of the components of Washingtons Housing and Economic Development sector. The Xs mark the groups collective opinion, based on existing data and expert judgment, as to how long the response and recovery of each component is likely to take if a scenario earthquake happened today. Colored areas indicate the targets that are necessary to ensure that Washington is resilient. Gaps between the Xs and colored areas reveal the need for further evaluation, policies, and actions to improve the states resilience.
This work group preferred to show how some components are likely to recover in stages. In the case of housing, the timing of the stages may be affected by the building code standards that were in place at the time of construction: because newer buildings are built to higher seismic standards, they can usually be expected to suffer less damage during an earthquake. 
KEY TO THE TABLE
TARGETS TO ACHIEVE DIFFERENT LEVELS OF RECOVERY:

Minimal:


Functional:


Operational* (time it ought to take to restore component to 8090% operational):

TIME NEEDED FOR RECOVERY TO 8090% OPERATIONAL GIVEN CURRENT CONDITIONS:

For a number of components, the timeframes marked in the table reflect the estimated recovery period following a worst case scenario earthquake. 


TARGET STATES OF RECOVERY: WASHINGTONS HOUSING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT SECTOR  

Event occurs
024 hours
13 days
37 days
1 week    1 month
13 months
3 months    1 year
13 years
3+ years
Finance and banking









Commerce (commercial facilities)









Real estate and construction









Manufacturing (industrial facilities)









Planning and community development









Unreinforced masonry structures









Housing









     Detached single-family residential 
     (pre-1950)









     Detached single-family residential
     (post 1950)









     Mid- and high-rise structures (pre-
     1977)









     Mid- and high-rise structures (post
     1977)












Workshop Report II contains detailed examples of the variables that are likely to affect the actual timeframe of each components response and recovery; it also contains sector-specific recommendations for improving resilience. (For a copy of Workshop Report II, see the Supplemental Materials listed on page ii above.)
Occupiable means that a housing unit is structurally sound, safe, and sanitary (sewer and water are available in the unit or nearby), and people can use it to shelter in place following the earthquake.
DESCRIPTIONS OF COMPONENTS OF THE HOUSING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT SECTOR

ESTIMATED TIMEFRAME FOR RESPONSE & RECOVERY
Finance and banking includes local branches of banks, ATM machines, and insurance providers.

 Target: 
 Minimum: in 13 days, at least 50% of services are restored 
 Functional: in 37 days, at least 75% of services are restored 
 Operational: in 1 week month, at least 90% of services are restored  
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 37 days
Commerce (commercial facilities) consists of retail businesses (local stores as well as regional and national chains).  

 Target: 
 Minimum: in 13 days, retailers gain access to facilities and focus on cleaning up and assessing inventory. 
 Functional: in 37 days, utilities are restored, just-in-time inventories begin to be restocked, and stores have some ability to provide merchandise to customers. 
 Operational: in 1 week month, stores are able to restock and sell merchandise with few limitations. 
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 13 months
Real estate and construction includes construction companies, contractors, and real estate agencies. 

 Target: 
 Minimum: 13 days 
 Functional: 37 days 
 Operational: 1 week month
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 37 days
Manufacturing (industrial facilities) includes manufacturers such as Boeing and the buildings and equipment on which they rely. 

 Target: 
 Minimum: 37 days 
 Functional: 1 week month 
 Operational: 13 months
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 1 week month
Planning & community development includes building codes, permitting processes, and the capacity of local governments and state agencies to review plans and issue permits for demolition, repairs, and new construction.

 Target: 
 Minimum: 37 days 
 Functional: 1 week month 
 Operational: 13 months
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 13 months
Unreinforced Masonry Structures (URMs) refers to a common type of older construction that is especially vulnerable to earthquakes. Many historic buildings are URMs. 

 Target: in 3 months year, 80% of URMs are occupiable)
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 3+ years


Housing refers to all residential structures except URMs. 

(The estimates for residential buildings differ according to type and date of construction.)
Detached Single-Family Residential (Pre-1950)

 Target: 
 Functional: 75% of homes occupiable in 13 days 
 Operational: 90% occupiable in 37 days  
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 3 months year
Detached Single-Family Residential (Post 1950)

 Target: 
 Functional: 75% of homes occupiable in 024 hours 
 Operational: 90 % occupiable in 13 days 
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 1 week month
Mid- and High-rise Structures (Pre-1977)
mid-rise: 410 stories
high-rise: more than 10 stories

 Target: 
 Functional: 50% of structures occupiable in 37 days 
 Operational: 90% occupiable in 13 months  
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 13 years
Mid- and High-rise Structures (Post 1977)
mid-rise: 410 stories
high-rise: more than 10 stories

 Target: 
 Functional: 75% of structures occupiable in 13 days
 Operational: 90% occupiable in 1 weekmonth   
 Timeframe based on current capacity: 13 months


