 

 

 
INTRODUCTION 
When a major earthquake strikes the , we will face thousands of casualties, hundreds of 
thousands of displaced households, and losses in the hundreds of billions of dollars. Recovery will take 
years. 
This paper addresses one aspect of the broader policy problem related to making San Francisco resilient 
in the face of a disaster - the standards we use for deciding when a structure is safe enough. Our 
building code embodies hundreds of judgment calls about how strong structures should be, but the public 
and the policy makers generally have no idea what these standards mean, what the outcomes will be from 
the black box of engineering decisions. 
The truth is that when we choose our engineering standards we really are choosing to define how many 
deaths, how many building demolitions, and how long a recovery time we will have for various levels of 
earthquakes. Currently, the City of San Francisco has no adopted performance objectives for determining 
these factors. As a result, 
 Design and construction requirements for new construction still focus mostly on preventing the 
loss of life and in most cases ignore the question of building damage and post-earthquake 
usability. 
 Little is being done to rehabilitate older existing structures, which constitute the majority of 
buildings and which were built without earthquake-resistant features now required.  
 There is no consistent approach to providing, maintaining, and restoring lifeline systems that are 
needed to support economic recovery. 
 
The overall impact and cost of a disaster is strongly influenced by how long it takes to recover. The time 
needed to recover depends on the level of damage sustained by buildings, the availability of utilities, and 
how quickly communities can re-establish usable housing and livable environments.  
This paper provides a new framework for improving San Franciscos resilience through seismic 
mitigation policies. Our goals are to: 
a. define the concept of resilience in the context of disaster planning,  
b. establish performance goals for the expected earthquake that supports our definition of 
resilience,  
c. define transparent performance measures that help us reach our performance goals; and  
d. suggest next steps for San Franciscos new buildings, existing buildings and lifelines.  
 
 
 
 
 
3    
 
 
A DISASTER RESILIENT SAN FRANCISCO 
Whether hit by a massive earthquake or by a hurricane, tornado, flood, or terrorist attack some 
communities have shown an incredible ability to recover, that is incredible resilience. Resilient 
communities have an ability to govern after a disaster has struck. These communities adhere to building 
standards that allow the power, water, and communication networks to begin operating again shortly after 
a disaster and that allow people to stay in their homes, travel to where they need to be, and resume a fairly 
normal living routine within weeks. They are able to return to a new normal within a few years. They 
are resilient communities because such a blow from nature remains a disaster, but does not become a 
catastrophe  that defies recovery.  
 believes that San Franciscos disaster planning efforts must stem from a clear understanding of 
resilience.  defines seismic resilience as the ability of the city to remain safe and usable after a 
major earthquake A resilient city is able to contain the effects of earthquakes when they occur, carry out 
recovery activities in ways that minimize social disruption, and rebuild following earthquakes in ways 
that mitigate the effects of future earthquakes. San Franciscos current disaster planning efforts are 
moving in the right direction, but the lack of public knowledge about the current performance of our 
buildings and lifelines is hindering our ability to become a resilient city. .  
Efforts to define the citys seismic resilience objectives must come with a clear and transparent 
understanding of the hazards and risks that we face. These should be defined in terms of the earthquakes 
we expect to occur, the damage they will cause to the built environment, and the effects of that damage on 
response and recovery. What is needed is a set of simple, useful, and expanded performance goals 
adopted and accepted by policy makers that set reasonable standards for restoring everyday life in the 
wake of a disaster. The set of general recovery objectives now included in the City and County 
Emergency Response Plan (Appendix1) is a first good step.  believes that these policies need 
critical examination and expansion to focus on facilitating recovery. 
Achieving a desirable level of disaster resilience requires a clear and specific understanding of what is 
likely to happen in the wake of an earthquake, and specific ideas for how to improve the performance of 
facilities in order to meet adopted goals. Commonly held misconceptions of expected seismic 
performance confuse efforts to improve seismic resilience. For example, the common belief that buildings 
and infrastructure built to code are earthquake-proof is incorrect. Instead, many new facilities are 
designed today with the expectation (at least by the earthquake professionals) that significant damage 
likely will occur in a major earthquake.  believes that simple and direct descriptions of seismic 
performance goals should be adopted so that regulations to achieve these goals can be developed. 
Recommended goals are summarized below for how building performance should be categorized given 
the major earthquake that is expected to occur. 
 
PERFORMANCE GOALS FOR THE EXPECTED EARTHQUAKE 
 is not recommending that all facilities be upgraded to a level that would make them damage proof 
without regard to cost. Rather, our intent is to clarify the level of damage that is acceptable and require 
only those improvements in performance needed to assure a quick recovery, or the level of resilience 
desired. We believe that most of the current criteria for new buildings are adequate, and the need for 
strengthening existing buildings is perhaps less extensive than generally perceived. Nevertheless, some 
important changes are needed.  
For purposes of this discussion, seismic performance goals are stated in terms of the general states of 
damage and repair over an extended recovery period under the assumption that an expected earthquake 
has occurred. We chose to analyze the expected earthquake, rather than the extreme event, because it 
4    
 
 
is a large event that can reasonably be expected to occur once during the useful life of a structure or 
lifeline system (see section, Defining the Expected Earthquake, below)  
We have defined performance goals in terms of three response and recovery phases, four categories or 
"clusters" of infrastructure types, eight performance categories and selected time frames as shown in the 
tables below.  
TABLE 1: RECOVERY OBJECTIVES BY TIMEFRAME 
Phase Time Condition of the built environment 
Frame 
 
1. 1 to 7 days Initial Response and staging for reconstruction 
 Immediate Mayor proclaims a local emergency and opens the Emergency Operations Center. 
Hospitals, police stations, re stations, and City Department Operations Centers are 
operational. 
 Within 4 People who leave or return to the city in order to get home are able to do so. 
hours: 
 Within 24 Emergency response workers are able to activate and their operations are fully 
hours mobilized. Hotels designated to house emergency response workers are safe and 
usable Shelters are open. All occupied households are inspected by their occupants 
and less than 5 percent of all dwelling units are found unsafe to be occupied. 
Residents will shelter in place1 in supercially damaged buildings even if utility 
services are not functioning. 
 Within 72 Ninety percent of the utility systems (power, water. waste water, and communication 
hours systems) are operational and serving the facilities supporting emergency operations 
and neighborhoods.  Ninety percent of the major transportation systems routes, 
including Bay crossings and airports, are open at least for emergency response. The 
focus of the initial recovery and reconstruction efforts will be focused on repairing 
residences, schools and medical provider ofces to a usable condition and providing 
the utilities they need to function. Essential City services are fully restored. 
2. 30 to 60 Housing restored  ongoing social needs met 
days 
 Within 30 All utility systems and transportation routes serving neighborhoods are restored to 95 
days percent of pre-event service levels, public transportation is running at 90 percent 
capacity, Public schools are open and in session. Ninety percent of the neighborhood 
businesses are open and serving the workforce. 
 Within 60 Airports are open for general use, public transportation is running at 95 percent 
days capacity, minor transportation routes are repaired and reopened. 
3 Several Long Term Reconstruction 
Years 
 Within 4 Temporary shelters are closed.  All displaced households have returned home or have 
                                                        
1 Shelter in place is used by emergency response professionals to mean the place in a building where people can 
seek safety during a life threatening incident.  uses "shelter in place" to mean that a building is disaster 
resilient enough for people to safely remain in their home during both the earthquake itself and subsequent needed 
repairs, even though the public utility systems may not be working.  
5    
 
 
months permanently relocated. 95 percent of the community retail services are reopened. 50 
Within 3 percent of the non-workforce support businesses are reopened. 
years All business operations, including all City services not related to emergency response 
or reconstruction, are restored to pre-earthquake levels. 
 
 
DEFINING THE EXPECTED EARTHQUAKE 
A defined level of earthquake performance only makes sense if you also define which earthquake youre 
talking about. The same damage or disruption that might be forgivable in a large earthquake might be 
unacceptable in a small one. 
Earthquakes are commonly reported in the public press in terms of the Richter Magnitude. That measure 
was defined in the early 1940s and is useful only for quantifying the energy released overall by a single 
earthquake. It offers little in terms of how buildings or infrastructure will fare or how they should be 
designed.  
In order to evaluate an existing facility or design a new one, earth scientists and engineers today use 
different measures  to quantify the intensity of the expected shaking at a specific site. These engineering 
measures account for the possible effects of different earthquakes on multiple faults and therefore are 
defined in probabilistic terms. For example, a building might be designed for the level of shaking 
expected to occur with 10% probability over a 50-year time period.  
A third way of defining earthquakes involves scenario events:  specific hypothetical earthquakes 
defined by the location of the fault rupture and the magnitude of the energy released. For example, a 
magnitude 6.9  earthquake on the San Andreas fault near Santa Cruz would be one scenario event of 
possible interest in San Francisco, as that would represent a repeat of the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake. 
Scenario earthquakes are especially useful for city-wide or regional planning. They also are easier to 
grasp than probabilistic measures and are therefore effective for communicating earthquake risk to policy 
makers and to the public. In 2003, the San Francisco Department of Building Inspections Community 
Action Plan for Seismic Safety chose four scenario earthquakes as the basis for its planning and 
mitigation programs. 
For the purposes of defining resilience and developing mitigation policies to achieve it,  uses one of 
the scenario earthquakes also used by the Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety and refers to it as 
the expected earthquake: A magnitude 7.2 earthquake located on the Peninsula segment of the San 
Andreas fault. 
Our expectations, our goals, and our recommendations are presented with this event in mind. This 
expected earthquake can be expected  - conservatively but reasonably to occur once during the useful life 
of a structure or system, and more frequently if the structure is renovated periodically (as most San 
Francisco buildings are) to serve more than one or two generations. Of course, this defined scenario 
would produce different levels of shaking at different locations, but for most of the city, its effects would 
be similar, in probabilistic terms, to those with a 10 percent chance of occurring over a 50-year period. 
We define resilience in terms of this expected earthquake. Other earthquakes are possible, of course. In a 
smaller, more routine earthquake, better performance would be expected. For a larger, more extreme 
event, lesser performance would have to be tolerated. All three events are defined below to encourage 
uniform definitions.  
6    
 
 
TABLE 2: EARTHQUAKE LEVELS DEFINED  
Routine Earthquakes that are likely to occur routinely. Routine earthquakes are dened as 
having a 70 percent probability of occurring in 50 years. In general, earthquakes of this 
size will have magnitudes equal to 5.0 - 5.5, should not cause any noticeable damage, 
and should only serve as a reminder of the inevitable. San Franciscos Department of 
Building Inspection (DBI) uses this earthquake level in their Administrative Bulletin AB 
083 for purposes of dening the service level performance of tall buildings. 
Expected An earthquake that can reasonably be expected to occur once during the useful life of a 
structure or system. It is dened as having a 10 percent probability of occurrence in 50 
years. San Franciscos Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety  (CAPSS) assumed 
that a magnitude 7.2 earthquake located on the peninsula segment of the San Andreas 
Fault would produce this level of shaking in most of the City. Because structures can 
last for hundreds of years, but typically need to be refurbished every 30 to 50 years, a 
50- year period is appropriate. Creating a resilient San Francisco based on this 
expected shaking intensity, associated with this size of earthquake is a practical and 
prudent basis for public policy. 
Extreme The extreme earthquake that can reasonably be expected to occur on a nearby fault. It 
(Maximum is dened as having a 2 percent probability of occurrence in 50 years. The CAPSS 
Considered dened magnitude 7.9 earthquake located on the peninsula segment of the San 
Earthquake) Andreas Fault would produce this level of shaking in most of the city.  
 
DEFINING TRANSPARENT PERFORMANCE MEASURES  
Declaring in simple, concise and understandable terms the expected seismic performance of structures 
and systems given a specific earthquake size requires first the adoption of terms that are recognizable, 
consistent with other performance rating systems, and useful is establishing policy. While the earthquake 
professional community has learned that expected seismic performance is best measured and expressed in 
terms of casualties (lives lost and serious injuries), dollar loss (cost of repair as a percentage of 
replacement value), and the length of time required to repair for reuse or restore service, no standard set 
of performance measures is in use. 
The various engineering professions use a wide variety of terms to describe their performance 
expectations and, in some cases, do not clearly state what they are. In the case of new buildings, the code 
requires different design standards for essential facilities, high occupancy facilities, and facilities 
containing hazardous materials, but stops short of declaring what performance is expected. Rehabilitation 
standards for existing buildings that are undergoing refurbishment are often designed to an explicit 
performance level but many voluntary retrofits are done to no specific standard. Utility systems are often 
designed with employee safety goals and expected days to restore service to users, though there is no 
consistency. 
Most important, even when performance objectives are explicitly defined, they are almost always stated 
in terms of safety only  that is, in terms of whether people nearby would be injured during the 
earthquake itself. While safety is essential, this limited perspective fails to address the larger questions of 
resilience: Will the buildings be usable when the shaking stops, and how soon will full services be 
restored? 
For purposes of understanding and working toward resilience,   defines categories of the expected 
performance of buildings and lifeline systems in terms of both safety during the earthquake and usability 
during the response and recovery periods that follow. Lifeline performance is further defined in terms of 
the time allowed to resume service.  
7    
 
 
 uses the following terms in developing new building design standards and mitigation programs 
needed to achieve San Franciscos resilience objectives. The levels of performance they describe are to be 
paired with the effects of the Expected earthquake. Table 3 presents these performance measures in a 
tabular form. 
 
TABLE 3:  SEISMIC PERFORMANCE MEASURES FOR BUILDINGS 
Category Safe and Operational. This describes the performance now expected of new essential facilities 
A: such as hospitals and emergency operations centers. Buildings will experience only very minor 
damage and have energy, water, wastewater, and telecommunications systems to back-up any 
disruption to the normal utility services.  
Category Safe and usable during repair. This describes the performance needed for buildings that will be 
B: used to shelter in place and for some emergency operations. Buildings will experience damage 
and disruption to their utility services, but no signicant damage to the structural system. They 
may be occupied without restriction and are expected to receive a green tag1 after the 
expected earthquake. 
Category Safe and usable after repair. This describes the current expectation for new, non-essential 
C: buildings. Buildings may experience signicant structural damage that will require repairs prior to 
resuming unrestricted occupancy and therefore are expected to receive a yellow tag2 after the 
expected earthquake. Time required for repair will likely vary from four months to three years or 
more. 
Category Safe but not Repairable. This level of performance represents the low end of acceptability for 
D: new, non-essential buildings, and is often used as a performance goal for existing buildings 
undergoing rehabilitation. Buildings may experience extensive structural damage and may be 
near collapse. Even if repair is technically feasible, it might not be nancially justiable. Many 
buildings performing at this level are expected to receive a red tag3 after the expected 
earthquake. 
Category Unsafe: Partial or complete collapse. Damage that will likely lead to signicant casualties in the 
E: event of an expected earthquake. These are the killer buildings that need to be addressed 
most urgently by new mitigation policies. 
 
In addition,  defines the expected performance of all utility and transportation systems, or portions 
of systems, serving the City in terms of the days required to restore service to 90 percent, 95 percent and 
100 percent of the defined customer base. 
 
Category I-Resume 100 percent of service levels within four hours.  
Critical response facilities - including emergency housing centers  need to be supported by utility and 
transportation systems critical to their success. This level of performance assures that these systems will 
be available within four hours of the disaster. It requires a combination of well built buildings and 
systems, provisions for making immediate repairs as needed, and redundancy within the networks that 
allows troubled spots to be isolated.  
 
                                                        
1 Building inspected and deemed safe for occupancy. 
2 Building inspected and found to be damaged enough to warrant restricted access. 
3 Building inspected and found to be unsafe to occupy.  
8    
 
 
Category II--Resume  90 percent service within 72 hours, 95 percent within 30 days, 100 percent 
within four months 
Housing and residential neighborhoods require utility and transportation systems be restored quickly so 
that these areas can brought back to livable conditions. There is time to make repairs to lightly damaged 
buildings and replace isolated portions of the networks or create alternate paths for bridging around the 
damage. There is time for parts and materials needed for repairs to be imported into damaged areas. These 
systems need to have a higher level of resilience and redundancy than the systems that support the rest of 
the city. 
 
Category III-Resume 90 percent of service within 72 hours, 95 percent within 30 days, 100 percent 
within three years 
The balance of the city needs to have it's systems restored as buildings are repaired and returned to 
operation. There is time to repair and replace older vulnerable systems with new. Temporary systems can 
be installed as needed. Most existing lifeline systems will qualify for Category III performance. 
 
TABLE 4: DEFINING RESILIENCE FOR SAN FRANCISCO 
As mentioned above,  defines San Franciscos seismic resilience as its ability to contain the 
effects of earthquakes when they occur, carry out recovery activities in ways that minimize social 
disruption, and rebuild following earthquakes in ways that mitigate the effects of future earthquakes. This 
chart represents our best thinking as to how a resilient San Francisco ought to perform in the event of an 
expected earthquake, and how far away we are right now from meeting that goal.  
9    
 
 
 
 
10    
 
 
NEXT STEPS  
While this paper denes the goal of a earthquake-resilient San Francisco, new papers on new 
buildings, existing buildings, and lifelines recommend actions to achieve this goal.  Overall 
s specic recommendations for action have been developed by considering:  
(1) the goals for seismic resilience for  each component of our city  
(2) the gap between current seismic performance and the goal, and  
(3) the cost of making the necessary improvements or retrofits.   
Priority is given to those actions that provide the best improvement to seismic performance and resilience 
with the least amount of cost and disruption. 
s recommendations4 for existing buildings focus on dealing with the citys most seriously deficient 
buildings through mandatory programs where the needs are clear, and the development of additional 
programs where further definition is needed. Soft story wood frame buildings need to be retrofitted. 
Buildings providing shelter and other essential City services need to be evaluated and retrofitted as 
needed. San Franciscos non-ductile concrete buildings  structures that have frames of steel reinforced 
concrete, as differentiated from the typically brick built unreinforced masonry buildings, and that are 
vulnerable because their frames do not bend in earthquakes  need to be inventoried, and a program 
should be developed to mitigate their potential for collapse. Gas shut off valves need to be installed to 
prevent massive fires from consuming the city following an earthquake. And the adequacy of the 1992 
Unreinforced Masonry Building Retrofit Ordinance needs to be assessed.  
s recommendations for new buildings focus on adding transparency to the building code 
requirements; incorporating new, near term cost-effective improvements into the code; creating a 
certification system for voluntary seismic upgrades akin to the LEED system for green building 
standards; and adding strong incentives for owners to build to higher seismic standards. Owners and 
tenants need to understand what seismic performance to expect from the buildings they own, lease and 
construct, and the options they have for improvement. 
s recommendations for lifelines begin with the formation of a lifelines council that brings the 
various owners and operators together to assess the vulnerability of the systems that serve San Francisco. 
The council also should develop performance standards and retrofit priorities. The City needs to 
incorporate the needed retrofits into its capital improvement plans, give specific attention to managing the 
citys gas system, and form partnerships with the regional and state public and private providers to secure 
the necessary modifications to their systems. The City also should become an advocate at all levels for the 
development of consistent performance standards nationwide. 
Achieving disaster resilience is critical to the survival of San Francisco. Resiliency is not an impossible 
nor economically infeasible goal.  Success requires a clear understanding of what will happen, and what 
steps must be taken now  before the disaster -  coupled with an achievable implementation schedule and 
a rational program of incentives to make programs feasible. These recommended first steps serve to bring 
clarity and transparency to the problems we face, and set the stage for the development of detailed 
solutions. 
                                                        
4 The following paragraphs summarize the policy recommendations of 's three other "Before the Disaster" 
policy papers: ": Private Ownership, Public Risk," "Building it Right the First 
Time: Improving the Seismic Performance of New Buildings," and "Upgrading Infrastructure to Enhance San 
Francisco's Earthquake Resilience." All three papers can be found on 's website at www..org.  
11    
 
 
 believes that we must embark on what will likely be a 50-year process to make San Francisco a 
resilient city. The recommendations within this paper help us get started.  
 
APPENDIX ONE 
 San Francisco has maintained workable and exercised emergency operations plans for decades. The 
CCSF 2005 Emergency Operations Plan represents the latest complete document that outlines the 
organizational structure and operating procedures that are placed in effect in the event of a major 
earthquake. That plan is presently undergoing a complete revision and transformation into an all hazards, 
Emergency Response Plan.   
At present, the CCSF 2005 Emergency Operations Plan  Earthquake Response Plan Enhancement 
includes the follow general objectives and time frames that have been used as a basis for the Resilient 
City recommendations.  
 
GENERAL OBJECTIVES FOR RESPONSE OPERATIONS 
Immediately following a major earthquake, and for as long as a state of emergency exists within 
the CCSF, the response to the earthquake will be the rst priority of all CCSF departments and 
agencies. All available resources will be directed to achieving the following objectives: 
 
 Save lives. 
 Reduce immediate threats to life, public health and safety, and public and private property. 
 Provide necessary care, shelter, and medical services to CCSF residents and other members of the 
general public. 
 Restore the operations of facilities, whether public or privately owned, that are essential to health, 
safety, and welfare of the community, including critical CCSF facilities, hospitals, utilities, and 
transportation infrastructure. 
 Assess damage to infrastructure, public facilities, and the built environment. 
 Expedite the restoration of services, the economy, and the community at large; and begin the 
process of recovery. 
 Keep the public informed. 
 
   
 
 
 
:  

San Franciscos earthquake resilience is limited by its existing building stock. Some of our buildings are 
simply unsafe. But a broader problem, fundamental to emergency planning, is that even our safe buildings 
are inadequate to support the response and recovery efforts we know will be needed. Mitigation should 
address that shortcoming; our policies and programs need to target the vulnerabilities that could turn a 
manageable emergency into a catastrophe. 
Resilience  the ability to respond to an earthquake emergency and to recover without lasting disruption  
can be measured by the speed and completeness with which essential functions, and eventually routine 
operations, are restored.  has proposed resilience targets for City services, housing, transportation, 
and other key sectors of the built environment.1 Hitting those targets will require usable buildings right 
away for evacuation centers, emergency shelters, hospitals, certain City departments, and the vast 
majority of private residences. Beyond the first 72 hours, recovery will depend on other structures too, 
like schools, offices, and retail. Earthquake resilience goes hand in hand with building performance. 
This paper links resilience-critical functions with the types of structures that house them. By 
understanding which services are affected by vulnerable structure types, we can improve not only 
individual building performance but citywide resilience as well. 
Six policy recommendations for existing buildings 
1. Mandated retrofit of soft-story woodframe multi-family housing.  
2. Mandated retrofit or redundancy for designated shelters. 
3. A mitigation program for essential city services. 
4. A mitigation program for critical non-ductile concrete buildings. 
5. Mandated and triggered retrofit of gas lines and gas-fired equipment. 
6. Assessment of the unreinforced masonry program. 
 
EXISTING BUILDINGS AND EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
San Francisco has more than 120,000 buildings,2 at least 90 percent of which were erected before the 
adoption of modern building codes in the mid-1970s. Most of these buildings are safe even in large 
earthquakes, meaning they wont flat out collapse, break apart, or shed their heavy skins onto sidewalks. 
But there will be damage. Many buildings, old and new, will see enough damage to make them unusable 
until theyre repaired. For a Loma Prieta-sized earthquake close to the city, 30,000 buildings could be 
damaged beyond repair by shaking and fire.3 Even if the true number is smaller, thousands of buildings 
will need substantial repairs before being reoccupied, and others will require inspection and lesser repairs. 
Losing a quarter of our existing building stock in a foreseeable event, even temporarily, is not acceptable. 
But neither is the cost of eliminating all potential losses. For a large earthquake in our lifetime, then, some 
damage is inevitable. But how much is acceptable? 
                                                        
1  Hazard Mitigation Task Force, The Resilient City: Defining What San Francisco Needs from its Seismic 
Mitigation Policies, January 9, 2008 (draft). 
2 Applied Technology Council (ATC), San Franciscos Earthquake Risk: Report on Potential Earthquake Impacts 
in San Francisco, March 1, 2005 (draft), Table 4. 
3 ATC, Table 15. 
3   
: 
 
 
It depends on what were trying to achieve. Would it be enough to eliminate the risk of life-threatening 
collapses? After all, the first goal of earthquake preparedness is to protect lives, and the Department of 
Building Inspections Code Advisory Committee has already called for a program of phased mandatory 
retrofits for collapse-hazard buildings.4 
But mere survival is not the only goal, especially from a citywide perspective. City policy must recognize 
responsibilities beyond basic safety and even beyond a simple reduction of damage. 
 advocates an earthquake preparedness policy that maximizes the Citys resilience. Planning for 
resilience means preparing our structures, networks, and organizations so that expected losses are not 
disproportionate or catastrophic. With respect to existing buildings, it does not mean eliminating the 
possibility of damage or even the possibility of some collapse; rather, it means targeting the right damage, 
the critical damage, first. 
So which buildings are critical to San Franciscos resilience? We know what services will be critical to 
earthquake response and recovery. We also know which structure types are most prone to collapse. What 
we need to know for assessing resilience is which structure types the critical services are in, and which of 
those buildings might be safe from collapse but are still not likely to be usable right away. 
 
WHY EXISTING BUILDINGS ARE CHALLENGING 
For any given building, structural engineers have tools for reliably predicting damage and assessing 
safety. Unfortunately, those tools work best with individual buildings whose structural attributes are 
known. Its harder to draw reliable conclusions about any class of buildings such as shelters, schools, or 
residences. Two aspects of traditional engineering practice make this challenging. 
First, existing buildings are relevant to resilience because of their occupancy  that is, because of the 
functions they house, whether residential, office, school, hospital, church, jail, warehouse and so on. But 
engineers classify and assess buildings not by occupancy but by structural materials (such as wood, 
masonry, concrete, or steel) and systems (such as frames and shear walls).  
 
Some historic correlations are helpful here. For example, most single-family residential buildings are of 
conventional wood construction. But the patterns are not robust enough to be consistently useful. Whats 
needed is an inventory that breaks out the structure types within each occupancy category.5 
                                                        
4 Code Advisory Committee, Department of Building Inspection, City and County of San Francisco, Policy 
Statement: San Franciscans have the right to occupy buildings that will not collapse in future earthquakes, 
November 16, 2005. 
5 The Department of Building Inspections CAPSS study has made some nominal distinctions among residential and 
commercial occupancies (see ATC, Tables 8 through 11), but CAPSS deals only with private buildings and does not 
address hospitals, schools, fire stations, etc. By contrast, the Citys draft Hazard Mitigation Plan lists public facilities 
but does so by occupancy only, ignoring the structure types and the variations in earthquake performance. Section 
6.3 of the draft plan acknowledges the value of s approach, but Section 8 fails to prioritize such a study. 
4   
: 
 
 
Second, existing buildings affect resilience to the degree they remain habitable or usable after the 
earthquake. Engineering assessments, however, rarely look at buildings this way, as they typically focus 
only on safety  that is, on whether occupants will be able to escape the building uninjured.6 Using 
s terminology, these assessments determine whether a building is in Category E, but they make 
little or no distinction between Categories A through D. Consider the Citys neighborhood recreation 
centers and department offices. Any engineering 
assessments done to date probably predict only s Performance Categories: 
whether these buildings might be evacuated safely and Safe does not always mean usable 
say little about whether they might remain in service to 
aid response and recovery. Some buildings can sustain Earthquake safety is largely about whether a 
damage but remain basically functional. A house that building can hold together while the ground is 
does that, for example, will not add to emergency shaking. To assess resilience, its just as 
shelter demands even if it needs costly repairs. On the important to know if the building will be 
other hand, a building might have very little structural usable once the shaking stops.  considers 
damage but go out of service due to plumbing damage both questions with its performance categories: 
or broken windows, or even because the contents and  
furniture have toppled or been scattered across the 
floor. Category A: Safe and Operational 
So while resilience is a function of occupancy and Category B: Safe and Usable during repair 
usability, engineers tend to look more at structure type Category C: Safe and Usable after repair 
and safety. These disconnects point to the need for 
more complete building inventory data: We need to Category D: Safe but not repairable 
know which structures house which occupancies. Category E: Unsafe 
Absent that data, can any broad observations be made? 
Though the relationship is fuzzy, it does stand to 
reason that post-earthquake usability correlates inversely with damage, and traditional building patterns 
do paint at least an impressionistic image of where our existing building stock might achieve or fall short 
of resilience goals. 
The following table summarizes the current status of our building stock, indicating roughly where certain 
structure types and hazards can be expected to compromise s recovery targets. The darkened cells 
suggest where the most urgent mitigation measures are needed. 
 
                                                        
6 Loss estimation tools such as HAZUS (used for the CAPSS study by Applied Technology Council) predict damage 
somewhat differently from basic safety assessments, but they still do not predict directly or reliably whether a 
building might remain in service. 
5   
: 
 
 
Estimated response and recovery feasibility by occupancy and structural vulnerability 
Vulnerable condition 
 
 
-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 exible diaphragm

 
Service /  
eys, cladding)
Occupancy compliant Unreinforced   story wood frameductile concrete frame
---Northridge steel systems
-
 
DBIMasonrySoftNonUnbraced cripple wallRigid wall PreSteel or concrete frame w/ URM inllMajor falling hazards  (chimnVulnerable gas lines and gasred equipmentVulnerable nonstructural components
First responders           
Medical services           
Single-family           
residences 
Multi-family           
residences 
Emergency           
shelters 
Essential City           
services 
Schools           
Social services           
Retail           
Businesses           
 
 The vulnerability is prevalent for the occupancy and is likely to hamper response and recovery. 
 The vulnerability is unknown but could be prevalent enough to hamper response and recovery. 
 The vulnerability is common for the occupancy and could affect response and recovery. 
 The vulnerability is not typically associated with the occupancy or critical to its response and 
recovery. 
 
 
6   
: 
 
 
 
A few observations from the table about San Franciscos current building stock: 
 Despite the strong historic performance of typical wood frame houses in earthquakes, San Franciscos 
residential buildings are likely to affect resilience citywide because of the prevalence of soft-story 
multi-unit buildings and house-over-garage conditions. Unbraced cripple walls, though common in 
older houses throughout California, are relatively rare in San Francisco; instead, our high density and 
narrow lots have made two-story house-over-garage construction more prevalent. 
 
 Neighborhood retailers and other businesses exist in nearly every structure type. As a sector, 
commercial occupancies can be affected by the broadest set of potential hazards and might therefore 
present the toughest challenge in terms of crafting simple, effective risk reduction policies. 
 
 Non-ductile concrete frame buildings probably house every critical occupancy. A more complete and 
reliable inventory will significantly inform any risk reduction program for these structures. 
 
 Nonstructural components include everything from ceilings and windows to boilers and plumbing. 
Their performance is notoriously unpredictable (due to a lack of building code provisions in the past 
and spotty construction quality more recently) and can affect the post-earthquake usability of almost 
every occupancy. 
 
 In addition to vulnerable construction, geotechnical conditions such as the potential for landslide or 
liquefaction often affect performance. While these factors are important, they are not listed because 
the vulnerability is entirely based on location and is not related to the occupancy of the building. 
 
NEAR-TERM MITIGATION STRATEGIES FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS 
Can building-by-building mitigation improve the resilience of a city of 120,000 structures? If its targeted 
to the critical services and structure types,  believes it can. Indeed, its a tenet of California policy 
that proactive risk reduction and loss prevention make it easier to respond to and recover from potentially 
disastrous events.7 The important thing for San Francisco is to find mitigation strategies that will be 
feasible on a citywide scale and to dovetail mitigation plans with response and recovery plans. In brief, 
effective resilience planning means if were not prepared to mitigate, we must be prepared to respond and 
recover, and if were not ready to respond and recover, we must take steps to mitigate.8 
Every sector of our existing building stock poses some risks and presents some opportunities to improve 
resilience. Ranking sectors by importance is not easy; there is no formula to balance effectiveness, cost, 
fairness, and expedience, no computer program we can run to spit out a consensus mitigation plan. Setting 
priorities and achieving consensus also is complicated because the best strategies to increase resilience 
citywide might not be the ones that most serve individual citizens self-interests. The Citys 
responsibilities  and therefore its risks too  are broader and deeper. 
In the end, mitigation programs are effective when they balance the needs and resources of all 
stakeholders. A mandatory program that no building owner can afford, or that causes enormous short-
                                                        
7 The  , State of California Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan, October 2007, 
section 1.1.  
8 OES, section 2.3.2. 
7   
: 
 
 
term disruption to achieve a hypothetical long-term result, will accomplish little. On the other hand, 
programs designed for the convenience or benefit of individuals dont often get the job done for the 
community. Political leadership and community willingness must be in sync. 
With this in mind,  recognizes that our shortfall in resilience is a problem almost a century in the 
making. It will not be solved in a quick decade with a short list of programs. Still, the City needs to get 
started with policies and initiatives that make sense in the near term, as well as commitments to stay on 
the job for a generation to come. There are dozens of ways to reduce our risk and increase our resilience. 
They are all valuable, but they cannot all be done at once. Near-term strategies should address our biggest 
resilience gaps and set the stage for equally important programs to come later. 
 has prioritized six policy recommendations for near-term mitigation of existing building risks. Not 
surprisingly, our resilience-based approach and our simultaneous attention to both occupancy and 
structure type have led to somewhat different top priorities than those in the Citys latest hazard 
mitigation plan.9 While the Citys draft priorities do include funding for an unspecified soft-story 
program, they cover mostly individual public facilities without an overarching set of citywide goals. 
 
s top policy recommendations: 
1. Mandated retrot of soft-story woodframe multi-family housing.  
Our current housing stock cannot provide the resilience we need. A documented history of poor 
performance and potentially disastrous effects on response and recovery make this a risk that deserves 
immediate attention. Not every residential building is a soft-story hazard, but soft-story conditions 
probably will determine whether our housing stock as a whole can meet a high resilience objective. 
The Department of Building Inspections CAPSS study estimates that a major  earthquake 
could render 2000 or more of these buildings uninhabitable, leading to the loss of housing for 50,000 
residents.10 
These vulnerable buildings need to be identified and, as a class, they need to perform better. Because 
they are critical to our ability to find post-earthquake shelter in our own homes, they must remain not 
only repairable, but habitable. A mitigation program coordinated with citywide resilience goals would 
be consistent with existing City policy to facilitate shelter-in-place and post-earthquake damage 
assessment plans.11 
 recommends a program of mandated retrofits over a feasible compliance period as was done 
for unreinforced masonry buildings. Ample background work by the Department of Building 
Inspection and the readiness of policy-makers12 will make a mandate feasible. A phased program 
                                                        
9 City and County of San Francisco, Draft Hazard Mitigation Plan, posted September 5, 2008, section 8. 
10 Robert Selna, S.F. soft-story buildings at risk in quake, December 11, 2008. This article cites preliminary 
Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety data showing the City has 2800 buildings of three or more stories and 
five or more units in which the ground floor openings are substantial enough to indicate a soft-story condition. 
11 City and County of San Francisco, All-Hazards Strategic Plan, 2008. Strategic Goal 15 calls for development of 
plans to shelter or evacuate at-risk populations. Strategic Goal 19 is explicit about passing legislation to strengthen 
soft-story buildings, in the context of a general call to develop resources for the post-earthquake safety assessment 
of buildings and the resumption of their occupancy.  
12 Soft-story mitigation is already explicitly noted in the Citys 2008 All-Hazards Strategic Plan and in its draft 
Hazard Mitigation Plan. In July 2008, Mayor Gavin Newsom directed the Department of Building Inspection to 
develop a soft-story ordinance with incentives for voluntary retrofit (see Newsom, Seismic Strengthening of Soft 
Story Buildings). Those incentives were not approved, in part because voluntary work was not expected to be 
8   
: 
 
 
administered by DBI should follow the model of the Citys unreinforced masonry program. Whether 
an individual soft-story building needs to be retrofitted to Category C or B deserves further study by 
DBI through its CAPSS program. Exemptions and prioritization by building size, location, number of 
residential units, or other factors, with buildings housing low-income or otherwise socially vulnerable 
tenants meriting special interest, should be based on data already gathered by CAPSS. Further, the 
City should explore a full range of financial resources and incentives, including the potential for using 
bond funds left over from the Unreinforced Masonry Bond program, which distributed bond funds for 
the upgrade of unreinforced masonry buildings. 
 
2. Mandated retrot or redundancy for designated shelters. 
Until the housing stock is improved, we must be ready for the effects of significant housing losses. 
While the City has designated certain existing buildings to serve as shelters, it has not confirmed that 
those facilities will be sufficient or even usable after a damaging earthquake.13 
The City must make this among its highest near-term priorities. Using s terminology, these 
facilities must be capable of at least Category B performance. The Department of Emergency 
Management, which designates shelter facilities, should be the lead agency for this work. Following 
assessment of the facilities currently designated, the Department should propose measures to address 
identified deficiencies by 2015. 
 
3. A mitigation program for essential City services. 
Essential post-earthquake services are those needed to implement a sufficient response and recovery 
plan. They include certain City department operations, as well as medical and social services. While 
the need for these services is acknowledged in the Citys latest emergency planning documents, there 
does not appear to be a coordinated effort to identify and address critical vulnerabilities, even for city-
owned or city-leased facilities.14 
Of particular concern are medical and social services, which in San Francisco are provided in part by 
non-governmental organizations. If the City is relying on NGOs to make its emergency plan viable, it 
should allocate resources to help those organizations prepare. The Department of Emergency 
Management and the Department of Public Health should jointly engage the NGO community, 
coordinate the Citys emergency plan with those NGOs resources, and propose measures committing 
City resources to bridge the gaps those organizations  most of which are cash-poor  cannot fill on 
                                                                                                                                                                                   
effective, and in December 2008 the Mayors Office noted its openness to mitigation programs that might include 
mandated retrofit of certain buildings (see Selna, S.F. soft-story buildings at risk in quake). 
13 While the Citys Emergency Response Plan and All-Hazards Strategic Plan anticipate the need to provide post-
earthquake shelters and to coordinate City departments to administer them, its draft Hazard Mitigation Plan does not 
list designated shelters as critical facilities (section 6.1.3). It does list San Francisco Unified School District 
buildings, the Civic Auditorium, and Moscone Center as critical, but it does not place any priority on measures to 
protect them (except to derive replacement values for asset management purposes). The Citys branch libraries and 
recreation centers are listed as non-critical facilities. 
14 For example, the 2008 Emergency Response Plan relies on Department Operations Centers for coordinated 
provision of emergency functions including mass feeding, housing, public health, etc., and the All-Hazards Strategic 
Plan describes several related Strategic Goals. Yet the draft Hazard Mitigation Plan, while it lists over 50 critical 
City-owned government and care facilities, does not appear to prioritize risk reduction for any of them. 
9   
: 
 
 
their own. Using s terminology, these facilities, if not backed-up by alternatives, must be 
capable of at least Category B performance. 
A coordinated analysis of combined public and private capacity, overlain by estimates of service 
demands, is doable by 2010. The analysis will inform selection of mitigation strategies that should be 
implemented by 2015. 
 
4. A mitigation program for critical non-ductile concrete buildings. 
Mitigation starts with inventory. By 2010, DBI should know how many of these obsolete and 
dangerous buildings are in the City, where they are, what services they house, and what effects their 
expected performance will have on response and recovery. As critical City-owned buildings are 
identified, DBI and the Department of Public Works should take steps to require seismic evaluations. 
DBI should also consider changes to San Francisco Building Code Chapter 34 to trigger seismic 
evaluations of privately-owned concrete buildings. Together with a growing body of technical and 
cost data, we will then be in a position to move forward with a program that targets the unacceptable 
risks with the most appropriate and effective strategies. 
 
5. Mandated and triggered retrot of gas lines and gas-red equipment. 
Fire can turn a manageable earthquake emergency into catastrophe. Since broken gas lines often are 
involved in earthquake-related fires, the best solution is to prevent ruptures by bracing equipment 
(such as water heaters) and using flexible lines and connections. If the structure itself is a collapse 
hazard, or if the gas line passes through a damageable building wall, then a different solution is 
needed. An excess-flow gas-shutoff device can be installed upstream of the potential rupture location. 
But theres a problem: The damageable building is the owners responsibility, but the line upstream 
of the meter belongs to the gas company. 
s recommendation is for mandated retrofit, guided by a coordinated study. The Department of 
Building Inspection must determine which City buildings are at risk of collapse or rupture. PG&E 
must determine where individual ruptures will do the most damage and where excess-flow shutoffs 
will be effective (they do not work well on low-pressure lines), based on knowledge of its own 
distribution system. From the combined data, DBI should develop a retrofit mandate for selected 
existing buildings, to be implemented jointly by PG&E and building owners. 
Meanwhile, the Department of Building Inspection and the Public Utilities Commission should work 
with PG&E, insurers, homeowners, and business associations to reach building owners and assist 
them in eliminating hazards voluntarily. DBI should consider requiring excess-flow shutoffs or 
seismic-triggered shutoffs on all new installations and should develop code provisions to trigger 
upgrades when properties are sold or altered.  
 
6. Assessment of the unreinforced masonry program. 
Retrofits of the Citys unreinforced masonry buildings, mandated by a 1992 ordinance in compliance 
with a 1986 state law, are nearly complete. While unquestionably beneficial, these retrofits were 
minimal, intended only to prevent wholesale structural collapse. The effort of the past sixteen years 
will save lives, but it will not keep buildings usable during response and recovery, and unreinforced 
masonry buildings as a group remain a significant source of potential losses. Using s 
terminology, most of them have been improved only from Category E to Category C or D. The 
10   
: 
 
 
Department of Building Inspection should now assess the completed program, draw lessons from it, 
and estimate the remaining risks in resilience terms. 
Even with these recommendations implemented, it is important to remember that resilience is an 
attribute of organizations or communities, not of buildings. The capacity of a building to remain in 
service can be critical, but it is only part of what is called continuity of operations. Just as important 
is the preparedness of the people and organizations a building houses and serves. 
Finally, its time for San Francisco to begin collecting and maintaining building data for use in 
resilience planning. We know the services that contribute to resilience, and we know the structural 
conditions that are prone to damage, but we dont know enough about which services are in which 
structures. A close look at our near-term recommendations will show that this unknown correlation is 
central to resilience planning. Basic structure type is information that can and should be tracked both 
to aid ongoing response planning and to confirm the viability of the Citys emergency plan. For 
buildings and services already designated as critical, the Department of Emergency Management 
must know (and then account for) the structures in question. For other buildings, from houses to high-
rises, DBI can collect valuable objective data  with no seismic assessment required  simply by 
requesting it in permit applications. 
 
11   
: 
 
 MITIGATION STRATEGIES 
Even where mitigation is necessary, it does not always have to involve an immediate mandate for 
structural retrofit. Effective risk reduction policies adopt and combine a variety of strategies: 
Inventory and planning- Inventories and studies do not reduce risk. But they do make risk 
reduction programs viable by building consensus around objective data. Knowing whats at risk is 
always sound policy. From an inventory, the effort can progress to planning, then to 
implementation. 
Mandated retrot- Generally enacted by legislation, mandated programs require work on specified 
buildings regardless of an owners intent. Mandates tend to address otherwise intractable conditions 
with long records of poor performance and sizable remaining inventories still at risk, especially 
where the mitigation would have a broad public benefit. Examples of mandated retrofit programs 
include the improvements to California hospitals (SB 1953) and programs for unreinforced masonry 
buildings in accord with Californias 1986 URM Law (SB 547). 
Voluntary retrot- Where mandates are not viable, a policy of voluntary retrofit can be effective. 
Driven only by owners knowledge and risk sensitivity, with minimal outside requirements, 
voluntary work can range from bracing a water heater to a complete structural upgrade. In booming 
economies, owners retrofit to limit business disruptions. In slower times, they have other priorities. 
Institutional owners do voluntary work to fulfill management responsibilities to their constituents. 
Voluntary work also can  be encouraged by education and by incentives such as fee or assessment 
waivers or grandfathering with respect to future mandates. 
Triggered retrot- Seismic improvements can be required, or triggered, by the scope of repairs, 
additions, alterations, changes of occupancy, or even changes in ownership. San Francisco has 
upgrade triggers in Chapter 34 of its Building Code. The work often is driven by business decisions 
to otherwise improve a property, so triggers can be effective if they apply when new funds are 
available. On the downside, an owners intended project might be scaled down or skipped 
completely in order to avoid triggering additional seismic requirements. 
Insurance and risk transfer- If an unacceptable risk cannot be actually removed, its financial 
component can sometimes be transferred through insurance or reinsurance. This strategy works best 
when expected losses are otherwise repairable, and when quick recovery or continuity of operations 
is not needed. 
Redundancy- Backup, or redundant, facilities dont reduce damage, but they can shorten the time 
needed to recover normal operations. Redundancy planning can save retrofit costs and avoid the 
service disruptions that sometimes come with retrofitting. The strategy also makes sense when the 
vulnerable facility is deficient in other ways as well, so that rebuilding makes more sense than 
retrofit. It is not an effective strategy where relocation cost and delay will interfere with critical 
post-earthquake operations. 
Occupancy resumption planning- When other risk reduction strategies are not feasible, or while 
they are being implemented, a plan to speed up re-occupancy (often as part of a broader continuity 
of operations plan) can at least aid recovery when the building remains habitable, even if it does not 
reduce damage or actual risk. The Citys All-Hazards Strategic Plan calls for enhancement of an 
existing program called BORP, but its draft Hazard Mitigation Plan does not prioritize the 
application of BORP to city-owned or city-leased facilities. 
 
 
 
 
12   
: 
 
 
PAYING FOR MITIGATION  
No discussion of programs and policies is complete without considering costs. Who should pay for 
retrofits the City determines are essential to its broad-based response and recovery plan? If 
individual buildings are improved, why should the whole community pay for the work? On the 
other hand, why should a relative few property owners have to improve their buildings if the 
improvements are clearly motivated by citywide needs  or in some cases, by the needs of other 
individuals or groups? 
In general, whoever owns the risk should pay to have it reduced. But whose risk is in question 
here if the issue is resilience? s recommendations are for City policies that benefit the City as 
a whole. Decisions to improve safety or insure against losses in any given building are, and should 
be, functions of the enlightened self-interests of individual owners and tenants. When  calls 
for retrofit of, say, a vulnerable apartment building, its not to reduce specific losses but to help 
limit the shelter demand and keep the housing stock stable. So while an individual owner might 
have the most direct benefit from a retrofit, the City reduces its risk too, and should therefore bear 
some portion of the costs in their broadest sense. At the same time, whoever benefits most from the 
City remaining productive, solvent, beautiful, functional  whoever benefits from San Francisco 
being San Francisco  must support the common wealth that in turn enriches them. 
The menu of mitigation strategies comes with a menu of payment options. As with most public 
works projects, major seismic retrofits are usually funded by bonds. Federal and state grants are 
also available on a competitive basis from the Department of Homeland Security, through 
Californias Office of Emergency Services. Mandated retrofits of private buildings are typically 
unfunded, and the affected owners must rely on loans, institutional bonds, or self-funding. If 
funding cannot be found, unintended consequences result: churches and hospitals are among the 
institutions that have closed their doors, unable to pay for mandated seismic improvements. 
Whether public funds could be granted to improve private buildings for the common good is a fair 
question that resilience advocates will have to address (though Oakland has already established 
such a program). Loans and incentives have ample precedent, but also inconsistent results. San 
Francisco made low interest loans available to owners of unreinforced masonry buildings in a 
program that went largely unused. With mixed success, some jurisdictions have offered incentives 
for voluntary retrofit in the form of waivers on permit fees, transfer taxes, assessments, etc. 
Certainly the funding mechanism must be suited to the stakeholders and the properties involved, 
and no single mechanism will work in all cases. A socio-economic study of how to fund effective 
earthquake risk reduction, though outside the scope of these recommendations, is a task  
looks forward to taking on. 
Two things we do know from past mitigation programs in San Francisco and elsewhere. First, for a 
policy to achieve its goal, it must be designed so the funders can rationally expect a benefit from 
their investments. Second, after the earthquake damage is done, even the most rational wish they 
had spent more to prepare. 
 
 
13   
: 
 
 
THE REMAINING RISK: A SECTOR-BY-SECTOR REVIEW 
s top near-term recommendations focus on the most severe disconnects between current conditions 
and recommended resilience goals, considering costs, benefits, and political viability. The near-term 
recommendations,  expects, can be implemented by 2015. At that point, or as new information 
becomes available, additional mitigation efforts can and should begin. Some ideas for those longer-term 
mitigation programs are given in the following sector-by-sector review of our expected resilience gaps. 
Meanwhile, theres no reason why private individuals and organizations should wait for a City policy to 
prod them to action. s recommendations address citywide resilience through public policy, but 
personal policy can be effective too. House by house, school by school, business by business, the same 
principles can be applied to reduce risk and help build the resilient city. 
 
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS AND FIRST RESPONDERS 
In 2006 the Citys Department of Public Works cited between 172 and 200 facilities critical to 
earthquake response and recovery and another 300 deemed important.15 The Citys latest Hazard 
Mitigation Plan currently lists 277 critical facilities, of which 145 are owned by the San Francisco 
Unified School District; leased facilities do not appear to be included.16 While the list thus appears to be 
in flux, it no doubt would include the relatively new Emergency Communications Center and Emergency 
Operations Center, police and fire stations, and buildings that support city departments executing 
response and recovery tasks. While the various planning documents make no performance predictions, 
they do acknowledge that certain public and private buildings will require immediate post-earthquake 
inspections and that the corps of trained inspectors will need to be enlarged.17  
New police and fire stations are designed to be functional immediately following an earthquake. Older 
facilities might have been designed to the higher criteria of their day, but even those designs are likely 
obsolete. The good news is that most of the Citys twelve police stations and 53 fire stations have been 
retrofitted. According to Fire Department and DPW data, all but one of the Citys fire stations have been 
retrofitted since a 1992 bond measure, though in some cases the work might have addressed only the 
critical roll-up doors.18 Beyond the structural performance, the SSFD acknowledged in 2006 that it still 
lacked a plan to have stations inspected for reoccupancy after an earthquake and that some stations still 
had no emergency generators or on-site supplies to support an extended response phase.19 
Among the police facilities, the departments Southern Station remains a concern. Along with the 
departments administrative headquarters and jail facilities for 800 inmates,20 Southern Station occupies 
                                                        
15 City and County of San Francisco, Earthquake Response Plan Enhancement, September 22, 2006 
(Administrative draft, version 1.0), section 7.10.1 and section 6.6.1. 
16 City and County of San Francisco, Draft Hazard Mitigation Plan, posted September 5, 2008, section 6.1.3. 
17 City and County of San Francisco, Earthquake Response Plan Enhancement, section 6.6.1, and All-Hazards 
Strategic Plan, section 3.1.5. 
18 M. Bello et al., San Francisco  fire stations  Seismic risk assessment, 2006, and Earthquake 
Engineering Research Institute  Northern California Chapter,  Best Practices in Earthquake Risk 
Reduction, April 2006. 
19 James M. Vannucchi, Preparation for Major Earthquake of the San Francisco Fire Department  Then & Now, 
April 18, 2006, page 7. 
20 City and County of San Francisco, Earthquake Response Plan Enhancement, section 4.4.5. 
14   
: 
 
 
parts of the Hall of Justice, a facility found seismically deficient in several separate reports produced 
since the Loma Prieta earthquake.21  
Of the City department offices needed for initial response and recovery, City Hall is a high-profile retrofit 
using base isolation technology. The main library is a 1996 base-isolated structure in the Civic Center that 
can also be expected to perform especially well. The Citys 2006 plan, however, identified Moscone 
Center or Bill Graham Auditorium as locations for an alternate seat of government.22 Whether these or the 
other critical facilities will be immediately usable is less well known. 
Recommended Mitigation: 
 Inventory DPWs critical facility list, tracking structure type, nonstructural components, and 
retrofit status.  
 Provide retrofit, replacement, or redundancy to ensure that response-critical facilities will be both 
safe and reliably functional. (This is one of s top near-term recommendations.)  
 Implement building occupancy resumption plans. 
 
HOSPITALS AND ANCILLARY MEDICAL FACILITIES 
The City counts thirteen hospitals within city limits,23 though the number of distinct buildings is higher.24 
All acute care hospitals in California are required by 1994 legislation to be seismically safe by 2013 and 
ready for post-earthquake operations by 2030. Several of San Franciscos facilities, notably San Francisco 
General Hospital, the regions only Level I Trauma Center, still require substantial retrofit.25 In November 
2008, San Francisco voters approved, with an 84% majority, $887 million in general obligation bonds to 
build a replacement facility on the SFGH campus. San Franciscos other public facility, Laguna Honda 
Hospital and Rehabilitation Center, is in the process of being replaced and upgraded. 
In addition to SFGH and Laguna Honda, eighteen neighborhood clinics and health centers (fourteen of 
which offer primary care services) participate in the Community Health Network of San Francisco.26 
Design of new clinics is regulated by Californias Office of Statewide Healthcare Planning and 
Development, but existing clinics, like existing government office buildings, were generally not designed 
to provide immediate post-earthquake service. Clinics and Health Centers, though likely to be critical to 
San Franciscos earthquake response, also are not subject to the upgrade requirements of acute-care 
hospitals. For example, some of the neighborhood satellite clinics are in retrofitted unreinforced masonry 
buildings. While parapet braces and wall anchors should prevent fatal collapses and falling hazards, they 
                                                        
21 Jaxon Van Derbeken, S.F. Hall of Justice  a shameful danger, San Francisco Chronicle, October 24, 2005. 
22 City and County of San Francisco, Earthquake Response Plan Enhancement, section 2.2.1. 
23 Ibid., section 4.4.4. 
24 For purposes of earthquake preparedness, a count of separate buildings is more meaningful. A building count can 
identify more specific risks and can also reveal useful redundancies. The Office of Statewide Health Planning and 
Development (OSHPD) tracks a different number of facilities because it distinguishes individual campuses and 
some individual buildings. 
25 In November 2007, the California Legislature allowed OSHPD to use HAZUS software (the same software used 
for the Citys CAPSS study) to reclassify some of the hospitals required to meet the 2013 deadline. To some, this 
suggested that the qualifying facilities pose less risk than initially believed, but that is not generally the case. First, 
the primary purpose of the reclassification was merely to determine which facilities might be allowed a deadline 
extension to 2030. Second, any reclassification would merely remove a facility from the list of collapse hazards. 
Post-earthquake usability would still be doubtful. Third, the reclassification applies primarily to facilities in the 
Central Valley. Hospitals in San Francisco will probably not be reclassified. 
26 See the Community Health Network website at http://www.dph.sf.ca.us/chn/HlthCtrs/MapHlthCtr.htm. 
15   
: 
 
 
hardly assure that these facilities will remain in service. To the extent that the City relies on the 
Community Health Network to supplement its hospitals in an emergency, it should be tracking and 
improving their facilities as well. 
Recommended Mitigation: 
 Develop a mitigation program for essential city services, starting with a detailed analysis of 
medical and social service resources. (This is one of s top near-term recommendations.) 
 Track OSHPD compliance of both the City-owned and privately-owned acute care facilities. 
 Complete the mandated retrofit or replacement of San Francisco General Hospital, and implement 
a near-term contingency plan for Level I Trauma Center services. 
 Inventory the neighborhood clinics and health centers, tracking structure type, nonstructural 
components, and retrofit status. 
 Retrofit, replace, or provide redundancy for privately-owned response-critical facilities to ensure 
both safe and usable performance. 
 Encourage privately-owned facilities to implement building occupancy resumption plans. 
 
HOUSING 
Probably the greatest determinant of successful earthquake response, and of San Franciscos resilience 
generally, will be the performance of its housing stock. Well over eighty percent of the citys existing 
buildings are for residential occupancy, and certain vulnerable critical structure types number in the 
thousands. 
As detailed in the Citys CAPSS study and its earthquake response plan, the potential losses are 
staggering. If the projections are realized, responders will be overwhelmed, and recovery will be late, 
slow, and costly. The Citys own planning documents acknowledge this. But if the performance overall 
can be improved so all but a relative few can find safe shelter in their own homes, then response can focus 
properly on the helpless and indigent, and recovery  which starts with the re-occupancy of damaged 
homes, schools, and workplaces  can begin straight away. 
While the CAPSS study has developed substantial data on the Citys housing stock, it has not made the 
distinctions necessary to identify particularly vulnerable occupants, such as the disabled or disadvantaged. 
Social vulnerability maps of San Francisco have been produced, but they have not yet been linked to 
structural data. Anecdotally, however, it is known that unreinforced masonry buildings (most of which 
have been nominally retrofitted in compliance with DBI requirements) account for a disproportionate 
share of single room occupancy and transitional housing in the Tenderloin and South of Market. 
Unreinforced masonry buildings account for some of the vulnerable housing stock  about 800 buildings 
when the Citys ordinance was developed in 1990.27 Again, even those buildings with required parapet 
bracing and wall anchors are likely to see damage, and many will not be immediately habitable after a 
large earthquake. 
Hillside houses and non-ductile concrete frame structures represent two more small but hazardous slices 
of the housing pie. These vary greatly in style and structural adequacy, but the worst of them, unlike, say, 
the worst cripple wall houses on flat sites, are likely killers. The City has no inventory of its hillside 
                                                        
27 Recht Hausrath & Associates, Seismic Retrofitting Alternatives for San Franciscos Unreinforced Masonry 
Buildings: Socioeconomic and Land Use Implications of Alternative Requirements, October 1990, page 28. 
16   
: 
 
 
houses or its NDC frames, though CAPSS has estimated that there are about 1900 NDC frames with brick 
infill panels.28 
Two of the most common residential building types suffer from the same basic structural flaw: too much 
open space on the ground floor. One of these is the house-over-garage, or HOG, typically a two-story 
single-family residence with a one-car garage taking a good part of the first floor. San Francisco has tens 
of thousands of these throughout the west half of the city, most within three miles of the off-shore San 
Andreas fault. Aside from brick chimneys and unbraced water heaters, the chief seismic deficiency in this 
house type is the openness of the front wall line with its wide garage door. As a class this simple building 
type is not thoroughly studied, and it might be as adequate as most houses of conventional wood framing. 
But if one is wracked, thousands are wracked, and if one catches fire, thousands could burn. 
The other hazardous wood structure type is the soft-story apartment building, of which the City has 
perhaps 3000, housing about 60,000 people.29 These buildings represent an array of obstacles to response 
and recovery. First, they perform poorly and are prone to collapse, as six did in the Marina district in 
Loma Prieta.30 Second, they provide housing for an enormous number of people, almost all middle-
income renters. The CAPSS study is estimating that as many as 80 percent of these vulnerable structures 
will be uninhabitable after a major earthquake.31 Third, when they do collapse or lean, they block streets 
and hamper response. Fourth, those that front onto shopping corridors house first-floor retail occupancies 
characteristic of San Francisco, whose loss will affect neighborhood resilience.  
Neither CAPSS nor DBI has counted the retrofits of residential buildings. Anecdotally, we know that 
some voluntary retrofits were motivated by nearby Marina district damage in Loma Prieta. Major 
renovations or condo conversions might have involved code-triggered seismic improvements. But these 
are rare exceptions. It is safe to say that very little of San Franciscos most vulnerable housing stock has 
been seismically improved since its original construction. 
Finally, as suggested above, our woodframe housing stock is vulnerable not only to structural damage but 
to fires caused by ruptured gas lines. Gas lines break either because gas-fired equipment slides or tips 
over or because the building is damaged where the line passes through a wall. Clearly, a collapsing HOG 
or soft-story building threatens to snap the gas line. More commonly, earthquake-related fires have started 
because unbraced water heaters topple. All new and replaced water heaters are required to be braced. 
Many old tanks have been voluntarily retrofitted as well. But many remain vulnerable. In the cheek-by-
jowl houses in the west half of the city, how many need to fall over and ignite before the fire department 
is unable to respond? 
Equipment bracing, installation of flexible lines, and mitigation of collapse-risk structures can effectively 
eliminate this risk. But if the problem is the release of gas from a ruptured line, a simple device that 
detects excess flow and shuts it off might be just as effective. In 2005, the state completed a legislatively-
mandated study of shutoff devices and found it unnecessary to require them in new residential buildings.32 
                                                        
28 ATC, Table 4. 
29 Robert Selna, S.F. soft-story buildings at risk in quake, December 11, 2008. This article cites preliminary 
CAPSS data showing the City has 2800 buildings of three or more stories and five or more units in which the 
ground floor openings are substantial enough to indicate a soft-story condition. 
30 Stephen K. Harris and John A. Egan, Effects of Ground Conditions on the Damage to Four-Story Corner 
Apartment Buildings, page F181. 
31 Robert Selna, S.F. soft-story buildings at risk in quake, December 11, 2008, citing preliminary CAPSS 
findings. 
32 Kim Strange, Information Bulletin 2005-02 (SHL), March 21, 2005. 
17   
: 
 
 
Of course, new buildings with newly installed appliances do not pose nearly the same risk as unbraced 
water heaters in vulnerable structures. San Francisco should follow the example set by Contra Costa 
County (and several of its cities), which requires excess flow gas shutoff devices in all new construction 
and triggers installation of shutoffs in certain existing buildings undergoing alteration.33 In addition to 
triggered mitigation, the City should work with PG&E to encourage voluntary installation of excess flow 
shutoff devices as well. 
Earthquake risk reduction for residential buildings is fraught with tradeoffs between public interests and 
private rights, especially in San Francisco where housing comes at a premium. There is no question that 
extensive housing losses will affect the Citys resilience, its economic vitality, and its very character  to 
say nothing of the safety of some of our most vulnerable neighbors. But compared with fire stations or 
hospitals, it remains difficult to demonstrate this abiding public interest when mitigation will so 
significantly affect individual building owners and could displace tenants. Still  advocates the 
following as principal strategies that deserve careful and immediate consideration. 
Recommended Mitigation: 
 Continue DBI efforts to inventory soft story multi-family residential buildings, working toward a 
mandatory strengthening ordinance modeled on San Franciscos unreinforced masonry 
requirements. (This is one of s top near-term recommendations.) 
 Develop code provisions to trigger water heater bracing and installation of excess flow gas 
shutoff devices upon sale of the building or issuance of permits for alteration or addition. 
Encourage voluntary bracing and shutoff installation as well. (This is one of s top near-
term recommendations.) 
 Inventory non-ductile concrete structures, with and without masonry infill panels. (This is one of 
s top near-term recommendations.) 
 For City-owned housing, provide retrofit, replacement, or redundancy to ensure that response- 
and recovery-critical facilities will be both safe and reliably functional. 
 For City-owned housing, implement building occupancy resumption plans. 
 For facilities run by NGOs, provide financial incentives (fee waivers, planning and design grants, 
in-kind services, transferable rights, tax credits and deductions, etc.) for earmarked donations to 
retrofit or replacement projects.  
 For NGO-run facilities, fund or provide building occupancy resumption plans. 
 Fund development of prescriptive plan sets for typical soft story multi-family residential 
buildings and house-over-garage single-family residences. 
 Encourage brick chimney bracing or removal. 
 Revise rent control and pass-through regulations so that voluntary retrofit is less costly to owners 
than demolition and reconstruction. Update, extend, and encourage assessment exclusions similar 
to those provided by California Revenue and Taxation Code section 74.5. 
 Extend new and existing inventories to study correlations between housing stock and socially 
vulnerable populations. 
 
Emergency shelters 
The Citys 2006 plan estimates, Approximately 50,000 people will seek shelter at sites run by the [City] 
and by private nonprofit organizations, churches, and other organizations.34 The City maintains a 
                                                        
33 Contra Costa County Board of Supervisors, Ordinance No. 2000-11: Gas Shut-off Devices, 2000. 
34 City and County of San Francisco, Earthquake Response Plan Enhancement, section 6.3.1. 
18   
: 
 
 
database of potential shelter facilities with capacity for 55,000 people, but it acknowledges expected 
shortages in supplies, trained personnel, and bed space, because designated shelter buildings might be 
damaged and unusable.35 While the plan discusses non-compliant disabled access at many of these 
facilities, it says little about their seismic safety or post-earthquake usability, acknowledging only that 
each facility should be inspected before it is staffed and opened 72 hours after the shaking. 
In addition to providing shelter for people displaced from damaged homes, designated shelter facilities 
might also be pressed into service as bulk distribution and feeding sites, personnel staging areas, general 
disaster assistance offices, etc. 
Potential shelters in San Francisco include four schools designated by the American Red Cross36 and 
probably several community centers (with auditoriums or gyms), or facilities managed by the Citys 
nonprofit partners. This again points to the disconnect between emergency priorities and building 
regulation. Unless they were designed for the nominally higher criteria used for new public assembly 
spaces or were designated as emergency shelters at the time of their original design, community centers, 
soup kitchens, and other potential shelter sites can not be expected to perform any better than typical 
housing or commercial buildings of similar construction. 
Several churches in San Francisco have been in the news in recent years for their struggles to fund 
retrofits, but the problem goes beyond historic unreinforced brick buildings. Recent studies of 
community- and faith-based organizations are finding facilities unlikely to support post-earthquake 
operations, let alone emergency-related surges in demand. Seismic assessments of City-owned recreation 
and cultural centers after the Loma Prieta earthquake found many that failed a life safety assessment. 
Two new efforts might nominally improve our preparedness with respect to emergency shelters. In 
January 2008, the  Super Urban Area Security Initiative (SUASI), in which the City participates, 
issued a Request for Proposals to create a database of 325 potential shelter sites in the 10-county SUASI 
region. However, SUASI focuses primarily on terrorism and largely presumes that shelters themselves 
will not be affected by the events in question. In February 2008, San Francisco voters approved $185 
million in bond funds for improvements to neighborhood parks and recreation facilities. Campaign 
literature promised to rebuild unstable recreation centers for earthquake safety, and the Citys 1992 
seismic assessments played a part in selecting the facilities, but most of the projects involve play areas 
and small restroom buildings, and it is unlikely that this work will improve any major buildings to serve 
as high-capacity shelters. 
Recommended Mitigation: 
 Coordinate with SUASI efforts to inventory all designated shelters, and extend the SUASI 
database to consider earthquake effects. 
 Apply incremental and triggered retrofits to improve potential shelter facilities for earthquake 
resistance when they are altered, renovated, or repaired. 
 For City-owned facilities, provide retrofit, replacement, or redundancy to ensure that response- 
and recovery-critical facilities will be both safe and reliably functional. Coordinate with projects 
that renovate cultural or recreational facilities. (This is one of s top near-term 
recommendations.) 
                                                        
35 Ibid., section 6.3.2. 
36 See the website of the San Francisco Unified School District, 
http://portal.sfusd.edu/template/default.cfm?page=emergency.attachment.t 
19   
: 
 
 
 For facilities run by community-based organizations, provide financial incentives (fee waivers, 
planning and design grants, in-kind services, transferable rights, tax credits and deductions, etc.) 
for earmarked donations to retrofit or replacement projects. 
 For CBO-run facilities, fund or provide building occupancy resumption plans. 
 
ESSENTIAL CITY SERVICES 
Other potentially critical facilities house the offices of City departments. Despite the Citys reliance on 
them, it is highly likely they were designed only for performance as routine office buildings and have 
obsolesced along with the rest of the existing building stock. The Citys 2006 earthquake plan indicates 
that 191 City-owned facilities were targeted for retrofit after the Loma Prieta earthquake and that less than 
half of those projects were complete by 2002.37 The 2008 draft Hazard Mitigation Plan does not prioritize 
retrofit of any department offices.38 
Recommended Mitigation: 
 Develop a mitigation program for essential city services, starting with a detailed analysis of 
medical and social service resources. Track City-owned facilities with respect to post-earthquake 
need, structure type, nonstructural components, and retrofit status. (This is one of s top 
near-term recommendations.) 
 Provide retrofit, replacement, or redundancy to ensure that response-critical facilities will be both 
safe and reliably functional. 
 Implement building occupancy resumption plans. 
 
SCHOOLS 
Despite seventy-five years of Field Act-compliant school construction, even some school facilities are 
vulnerable. A 2002 study by the Division of the State Architect, which regulates new school construction, 
found that 75% of the non-woodframe K-12 school buildings throughout the state provide unreliable or 
questionable seismic safety  to say nothing of their post-earthquake usability.39 In 2006, voters used 
Proposition 1D to earmark $200 million for the seismic retrofit of these buildings,40 but San Francisco 
does not appear to have taken advantage of these resources.41 Meanwhile, ABAGs regional hazard 
mitigation plan, in which San Francisco participates, cautions that designation as a potential emergency 
shelter does not mean that the school has had a hazard or structural evaluation to ensure its suitability.42 
Recommended Mitigation: 
 Coordinate with DSA to confirm and extend its 2002 study, with emphasis on non-ductile 
concrete structures. 
 Coordinate with mitigation strategies for designated emergency shelters. 
                                                        
37 City and County of San Francisco, Earthquake Response Plan Enhancement, section 4.4.5. 
38 City and County of San Francisco, Draft Hazard Mitigation Plan, posted September 5, 2008, Table 8-2. 
39 Department of General Services, Seismic Safety Inventory of California Public Schools, November 15, 2002. 
40 OES, section 5.5.4.1. 
41 Robert Selna, S.F. to check 12 schools seismic safety, August 24, 2008. 
42 Association of  Governments, Taming Natural Disasters: Multi-Jurisdictional Local Government 
Hazard Mitigation Plan for the San Francisco , March 17, 2005, page 27. 
20   
: 
 
 
 Provide retrofit, replacement, or redundancy to ensure that response-critical facilities will be both 
safe and repairable. 
 Implement building occupancy resumption plans. 
 
SOCIAL SERVICES FACILITIES 
The Citys response and initial recovery will rely not only on government services but on community-
based and faith-based organizations that routinely house, feed, care for, and otherwise assist the Citys 
most vulnerable residents, including at-risk youth, the indigent elderly, the disabled, the homeless, and the 
substance-addicted. Yet their facilities are no better prepared to survive earthquakes  and in many cases 
are more vulnerable than typical housing, retail, or office facilities. 
Recommended Mitigation: 
 Develop a mitigation program for essential city services, starting with a detailed analysis of 
medical and social service resources. (This is one of s top near-term recommendations.) 
 Develop a retrofit program for critical non-ductile concrete buildings, starting with inventory of 
pre-1980 concrete structures of all occupancies. (This is one of s top near-term 
recommendations.) 
 For facilities run by community-based organizations, provide financial incentives (fee waivers, 
planning and design grants, in-kind services, transferable rights, tax credits and deductions, etc.) 
for earmarked donations to retrofit or replacement projects. Update, extend, and encourage 
assessment exclusions similar to those provided by California Revenue and Taxation Code 
section 74.5. 
 For CBO-run facilities, fund or provide building occupancy resumption plans. 
 
COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS 
Commercial occupancies contribute to resilience as outlets for goods and services in the days after an 
earthquake, as providers of jobs to support recovery, and as generators of revenue for the City over the 
long term. 
Compared with residential buildings, quite a few commercial buildings have been retrofitted. San 
Francisco, like most California jurisdictions, requires seismic improvements only when a building is 
subject to major renovation or a change of occupancy. Commercial buildings change occupancy more 
frequently (for example, from warehouse to office to retail over the course of a generation), and many of 
San Franciscos buildings were adapted to new uses or new tenants during the boom of the late-1990s. 
Dozens of high-profile downtown buildings, including corporate headquarters, banks, hotels, theaters, 
department stores, etc., have been retrofitted since Loma Prieta. Along with these major renovations and 
seismic retrofits come improvements in fire suppression and life safety systems, which should aid post-
earthquake response as well. 
Still, most of these voluntary improvements were designed to ensure safety, not to keep the buildings in 
service after the earthquake. And for every retrofit there are untold numbers of similar structures still 
obsolescing. 
Vulnerable structure types commonly used for older commercial buildings include unreinforced masonry, 
non-ductile concrete frames (with or without masonry infill), precast tilt-up walls, precast (and sometimes 
post-tensioned) parking structures, and to a lesser degree, welded steel moment frames and braced frames 
of the types whose flaws were exposed by the Northridge earthquake. 
21   
: 
 
 
As discussed above, the citys 1250 or so commercial unreinforced masonry buildings have largely been 
improved as required by ordinance, but only to the extent that they will probably not kill anyone. 
Otherwise, because of the structural variation and because no reliable inventories exist, it is difficult to 
make an assessment of the commercial building stock beyond the estimates produced by the CAPSS 
study. 
Recommended Mitigation: 
 For commercial buildings, the emphasis should be on collapse prevention to limit response 
demands and on damage control to limit job loss and speed recovery.  
 Develop a retrofit program for critical non-ductile concrete buildings, starting with inventory of 
pre-1980 concrete structures of all occupancies. 
 Continue to encourage building occupancy resumption programs with outreach to small 
businesses. 
 Develop incentives for recovery-critical non-structural risk reduction, such as bracing of HVAC, 
power, water, and sewer components. 
 
  
22   
: 
 
 
REFERENCES 
Association of  Governments (ABAG), Taming Natural Disasters: Multi-Jurisdictional Local 
Government Hazard Mitigation Plan for the San Francisco , March 17, 2005. 
Applied Technology Council (ATC), San Franciscos Earthquake Risk: Report on Potential Earthquake 
Impacts in San Francisco, prepared for the San Francisco Department of Building Inspection, 
Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety (CAPSS), March 1, 2005 (draft). 
Bello, M. et al., San Francisco  fire stations  Seismic risk assessment, in Managing Risk in 
Earthquake Country (Proceedings of the 100th Anniversary Earthquake Conference, April 18-22, 
2006, San Francisco. 
City and County of San Francisco, All-Hazards Strategic Plan, 2008. Available at 
http://www.sfgov.org/site/uploadedfiles/oes/StrategicPlan2008.pdf. 
City and County of San Francisco, Earthquake Response Plan Enhancement, September 22, 2006 
(Administrative draft, version 1.0). Available at http://www.sfgov.org/site/oes_index.asp?id=27514. 
City and County of San Francisco, Emergency Operations Plan, Part I: Basic Plan, January 2005. 
City and County of San Francisco, Emergency Response Plan: An element of the CCSF Emergency 
Management Program, April 2008. Available at http://www.sfgov.org/site/oes_index.asp?id=27514. 
City and County of San Francisco, Draft Hazard Mitigation Plan, prepared by URS Corporation, 
undated, posted September 5, 2008 at http://www.sfgov.org/site/oes_index.asp. 
Code Advisory Committee, Department of Building Inspection, City and County of San Francisco, 
Policy Statement: San Franciscans have the right to occupy buildings that will not collapse in future 
earthquakes, November 16, 2005. 
Contra Costa County Board of Supervisors, Ordinance No. 2000-11: Gas Shut-off Devices, 2000. 
Department of General Services, Seismic Safety Inventory of California Public Schools, November 15, 
2002. 
Earthquake Engineering Research Institute  Northern California Chapter,  Best Practices in 
Earthquake Risk Reduction. Unpublished html document, April 2006. 
 (OES), State of California Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan, 
October 2007. 
Harris, Stephen K. and Egan, John A., Effects of Ground Conditions on the Damage to Four-Story 
Corner Apartment Buildings, in The Loma Prieta, California, Earthquake of October 17, 1989
Marina District (U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1551-F), Thomas D. ORourke, editor, 
United States Government Printing Office, Washington, 1992. 
Newsom, Gavin, Seismic Strengthening of Soft Story Buildings (Executive Directive 08-07), Office of 
the Mayor, City and County of San Francisco, July 7, 2008. Available at 
http://www.sfgov.org/site/dbi_page.asp?id=84080. 
Recht Hausrath & Associates, Seismic Retrofitting Alternatives for San Franciscos Unreinforced 
Masonry Buildings: Socioeconomic and Land Use Implications of Alternative Requirements, 
Prepared for the San Francisco Department of City Planning, October 1990. 
Selna, Robert, S.F. to check 12 schools seismic safety, San Francisco Chronicle (www.sfgate.com), 
August 24, 2008. 
23   
: 
 
 
Selna, Robert, S.F. soft-story buildings at risk in quake, San Francisco Chronicle (www.sfgate.com), 
December 11, 2008. 
 Hazard Mitigation Task Force, The Resilient City: Defining What San Francisco Needs from its 
Seismic Mitigation Policies, March 1st, 2009 (www..org) 
Strange, Kim, Information Bulletin 2005-02 (SHL), Department of Housing and Community 
Development, Division of Codes and Standards, March 21, 2005. 
Van Derbeken, Jaxon, S.F. Hall of Justice  a shameful danger, San Francisco Chronicle, October 24, 
2005. 
Vannucchi, James M., Preparation for Major Earthquake of the San Francisco Fire Department  Then & 
Now, United States Senate, Subcommittee on Disaster Prevention and Prediction, Senate Committee 
on Commerce, Science and Transportation, April 18, 2006. 
 
24   
: 
 
 
SEISMICALLY VULNERABLE STRUCTURES: 
AN ENGINEERS ROGUES GALLERY 
The science of earthquake-resistant design is only about 50 years old, and as a young discipline, it still 
grows in ts after each damaging event. Just as unreinforced brick buildings were recognized as 
widespread hazards in the 1930s, certain newer building types, including structures of all sizes and 
materials, are now known to be vulnerable. 
 
Unreinforced masonry bearing wall. These brick and 
mortar buildings have been killing people in California 
earthquakes since the Gold Rush. Often called URM, 
unreinforced masonry was outlawed after the 1933 Long 
Beach earthquake, but thousands of older buildings 
remained. The most common hazard involves unbraced 
parapets falling onto sidewalks and peeling the upper 
walls away from the roof. San Francisco adopted a 
parapet ordinance in 1969, but parapets are not the 
whole problem. In 1986, state legislation required 
jurisdictions in high seismic zones to adopt mitigation 
measures. San Franciscos URM ordinance was adopted 
after the Loma Prieta earthquake. 
 
Soft-story woodframe. An abundance of wall openings 
in the rst story, typically for garage bays or storefront 
windows, makes these buildings vulnerable to collapse as 
the exible rst story sways sideways. This class includes 
post-World War II apartment buildings with tuckunder 
parking as well as older buildings with garage doors 
instead of open stalls. Many of San Franciscos soft story 
buildings are further complicated by hillside conditions 
and by extensive openings along more than one side. 
 
25   
: 
 
 
House over garage. This is the smaller, single-family 
version of the soft story problem. Outside San Francisco, 
the HOG is often a ranch house with a two-car garage. 
Here, we have a handful of older prototypes numbering in 
the tens of thousands, block after block throughout the 
Richmond and Sunset Districts. On a 25-foot lot there is 
usually enough wall area, even with a garage opening and 
a wide main entrance, to accommodate a decent retrot 
sufcient to stiffen the structure, preventing collapse and, 
more important, maintaining habitability. 
 
Non-ductile concrete frame. Ductility is the property 
that allows a structure to bend without breaking. In 
concrete, its achieved by careful design of the 
embedded steel reinforcing bars  a lesson learned from 
the collapse of several relatively new concrete buildings in 
the 1971 San Fernando earthquake. Most pre-1980 
concrete structures are therefore suspect, but its unclear 
how many should be considered potential killers. Unlike 
URM or soft story buildings, NDC structures are hard to 
spot from the sidewalk, and their evaluation and retrot 
can require relatively sophisticated engineering. 
 
Tilt-up. Relatively cheap and fast to build, tilt-ups remain 
the structural system of choice for one-story warehouses, 
strip malls, and light industrial facilities. The chief 
deciency in pre-1995 tilt-ups is the connection between 
the rigid walls and the exible roof. When that connection 
fails, the concrete wall panel falls away from the building, 
and the roof collapses. Similar buildings with reinforced 
concrete block walls often have the same vulnerability. 
 
26   
: 
 
 
Cripple wall. The cripple wall is the short wood stud wall 
around a houses crawl space. With no stiff plaster 
nishes or room partitions in the crawl space, the 
perimeter cripple walls are inadequate to support the 
swaying house above. Like a soft story, the cripple walls 
lean, then fall over. Though rarely life-threatening, a 
cripple wall collapse displaces a family and destroys its 
chief economic asset. Cripple walls are easily and 
effectively retrotted by adding plywood sheathing inside 
the crawl space. 
 
Nonstructural components. Any part of a building thats 
heavy, brittle, or loosely attached, even if it carries no 
structural loads, is vulnerable to earthquake damage. The 
heavy parts  chimneys, brick veneer, concrete cladding 
panels  can be life threatening. The gas lines and gas-
red equipment can start res. The rest  light xtures, 
plumbing and sprinkler lines, HVAC equipment, shelving, 
and so on   can take a building out of service, disrupting 
operations and delaying recovery. 
 

 
2    
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The year is 2029 and a major earthquake, of an intensity not seen since 1906, hits the .  Like any 
earthquake it comes without warning, striking suddenly while the people of San Francisco go about their 
daily routines in the citys offices, homes, shops, and other community buildings.  Although the 
earthquake comes as a shock and surprise, it is not really unexpected.   In fact, we had been warned by 
seismologists and engineers that, sooner or later, such an event was inevitable. 
What happens when the quake strikes depends on how well the city has prepared in the previous twenty 
years.  In one scenario, little special preparation has been done:  a few existing buildings were retrofitted 
by owners voluntarily and a few others through attrition were replaced by newer structures.  The newer 
structures have better seismic performance than the older buildings and very few of these buildings 
collapse and kill occupants.  But many new structures are rendered unusable by the quake, some will not 
be back in service for months, and several are not economically repairable and must be demolished.  The 
damage has cascading consequences for San Francisco.   People are displaced from their homes, 
companies and residents are forced to move out of the area, small businesses fail, and reconstruction 
demands overwhelm the citys damaged infrastructure. 
An alternative scenario, promoted by , relies on San Francisco taking action now to prepare for 
earthquakes and improve the seismic performance of buildings and infrastructure.   defines this 
improved post-earthquake scenario for San Francisco using a timetable of targets for when the city will 
recover its functions and services.1   Achieving such targets will create a city that remains vibrant and 
resilient in the face of the inevitable earthquake. 
 Recommendations for New Buildings: 
 Establish seismic performance targets (and incentives) for new buildings that allow the city to 
recover quickly from the inevitable strong earthquake. 
 Make near-term improvements to the San Francisco Building Code to provide cost-effective 
improvements in seismic performance.  
 Declare the expected performance that will be achieved by the current building code, and develop 
options for quantifiably improved seismic performance.  
 Develop strong incentives and a clear communication of seismic performance expectations that 
encourage building to higher seismic standards.  
 
WHY NEW BUILDINGS? 
Improving the seismic performance of new buildings (that is, projects not yet built) is an important part of 
improved earthquake resilience for San Francisco, and is the subject of this paper.  While older buildings 
are more likely to be damaged than new structures, the cost to retrofit older buildings is relatively high.  
In contrast, improving the seismic safety of new structures costs relatively little and thus has a relatively 
good benefit-cost ratio.  Equally important, improving the safety of new structures helps arrest the growth 
                                                        
1 , The Resilient City, Overarching Paper, 2008 
3    
 
 
of earthquake threats in San Francisco.  We should be building new buildings that will not need costly 
repairs or subsequent seismic improvements. 
The most effective strategy for achieving s overall targets for building performance is to set a 
target for new buildings higher than the overall target, and to accept a target for existing buildings 
somewhat lower than the overall target.   
This idea is shown in Table 12.  The overall seismic performance targets for buildings result from the 
combination of performance targets for new and existing buildings.  In all cases, s overall 
performance targets require a substantial improvement in seismic performance compared to the current 
situation. 
 
 
 
BUILDING CODES FOR STRUCTURAL AND SEISMIC DESIGN 
The seismic performance of a building depends on the building code requirements to which it is designed, 
built, and inspected.  The building code provisions for earthquake design are updated approximately every 
                                                        
2 The table is based on a similar table in s The Resilient City overarching paper.  The table here shows the city 
functions and services related to buildings, with expanded detail. 
4    
 
 
five years, and with each revision important new requirements are added.  The local jurisdictionin this 
case the City and County of San Franciscohas the responsibility to enact and enforce a building code, 
typically using national and state codes with local amendments permitted. 
For seismic design, the overall trend is for requirements to become more restrictive with each revision to 
the building code.  The changes are made as new knowledge about the performance of structures in 
earthquakes becomes accepted by the profession.  Often this acceptance is slow; seismic performance 
issues identified by engineers and researchers can take years or decades to be fully incorporated into 
construction practice.  The occurrence of a damaging earthquake tends to increase the impetus for change.  
Many improvements to the earthquake requirements in the building codes come after damaging 
earthquakes.  The quakes that have red the most changes occurred in Long Beach in 1933, Anchorage 
Alaska in 1964, San Fernando in 1971, Loma Prieta in 1989, and Northridge in 1994.  But ideally, such 
improvements to the building codes would not have to wait for an earthquake to occur, but would instead 
be implemented before a damaging earthquake. 
It takes time for the profession to absorb, accept, and implement the new knowledge about structures in 
earthquakes.  Once the new concepts are accepted and developed into specific technical requirements, 
there is still a time lag in implementation.  The time lag between when the earthquake building 
requirements are essentially complete and when they become legally adopted is about five years.  For 
example, the major requirements for the current building code were essentially completed in 2003, they 
were adopted into a standard published in 2005, which was adopted into a national code in 2006, adopted 
by California in 2007, and adopted by San Francisco in 20083.   
One result of the development over time of more robust seismic requirements is a likelihood that a 
building designed to todays codes will at some point be judged deficient according to future standards 
for earthquake design.  In the , steel braced frame buildings constructed as recently as the late 
1980s, and steel moment frame buildings constructed as recently as 1995, are now considered to have 
structural deficiencies that will limit their ability to perform reliably in earthquakes.  
One strategy to avoid the pitfall of new buildings quickly becoming obsolete in terms of seismic 
performance is for the City to encourage (and provide incentives to) building developers to incorporate 
into the seismic-structural design state-of-the-art knowledge and approaches, even though such design 
practices are not yet required in building codes.   
 
SEISMIC PERFORMANCE CURRENTLY PROVIDED BY THE BUILDING CODE 
The level of seismic performance provided by the current building code is not explicitly defined.  In 
general language, the Structural Engineers Association of California4 states that the intention of the 
building code with respect to seismic performance is that a building designed to the code should be able 
to 
 Resist a minor level of earthquake ground motion without damage. 
 Resist a moderate level of earthquake ground motion without structural damage, but possibly 
experience some nonstructural damage. 
 Resist a major level of earthquake ground motion  without collapse, but possibly with some 
structural as well as nonstructural damage. 
                                                        
3  In 2003, requirements were essentially completed by the Building Seismic Safety Council (BSSC) for the National 
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program.  They were approved by BSSC in 2004, and adopted with modifications as 
a standard by the American Society of Civil Engineers in 2005.  A more expeditious process can be used in the rare 
case of urgent emergency code changes. 
4 SEAOC 1999 Blue Book 
5    
 
 
 
The Structural Engineers Association is intentionally vague in its description of expected performance - 
buildings are expected to possibly experience some nonstructural damage in a moderate level of 
earthquake ground motion, and some structural as well as nonstructural damage in a major level of 
earthquake ground motion.  This qualified language recognizes the variability in the observed perfor-
mance of buildings in earthquakes.  The variability in performance comes from the inherent randomness 
of earthquake and material phenomena, and from the limitations in our knowledge of the best methods 
and assumptions to use in all the steps of predicting seismic performance. 
Although the descriptions of the seismic performance intentions of the Building Code are vague, they 
undoubtedly define an expectation that is less ambitious than the targets proposed by  in Table 1.  If 
the  targets are to be met, new buildings in San Francisco should be designed for enhanced seismic 
performance rather than meeting the default of the building code. 
 
CLEAR COMMUNICATION OF SEISMIC PERFORMANCE EXPECTATIONS  
In parallel with improving seismic performance,  advocates a clearer communication of what 
seismic performance is expected from each building in our community.  We propose five categories of 
seismic performance: 
TABLE 2: SEISMIC PERFORMANCE MEASURES FOR BUILDINGS
Declaring in simple, concise and understandable terms the expected seismic performance of structures and systems, given a specic earthquake 
size, requires rst the adoption of terms that are recognizable, consistent with other performance rating systems and useful is establishing policy. 
 
CATEGORYBUILDINGS
ASafe and Operational. This describes the performance now expected of new essential facilities such as hospitals and 
emergency operations centers. Buildings will experience only very minor damage and have energy, water, wastewater and 
telecommunications systems to back up any disruption to the normal utility services. 
BSafe and usable during repair. This describes the performance needed for buildings that will be used to shelter in place and for 
some emergency operations. Buildings will experience damage and disruption to their utility services, but no signicant damage 
to the structural system. They may be occupied without restriction and are expected to receive a green tag  after the expected 
earthquake.
CSafe and usable after repair. This describes the current expectation for new, non-essential buildings. Buildings may experience 
signicant structural damage that will require repairs prior to resuming unrestricted occupancy, and therefore are expected to 
receive a yellow tag  after the expected earthquake. Time required for repair will likely vary from four months to three years or 
more.
DSafe but not repairable. This level of performance represents the low end of acceptability for new, non-essential buildings, 
and is often used as a performance goal for existing buildings undergoing rehabilitation. Buildings may experience extensive 
structural damage and may be near collapse. Even if repair is technically feasible, it might not be nancially justiable. Many 
buildings performing at this level are expected to receive a red tag  after the expected earthquake.
EUnsafe. Partial or complete collapse. Damage that will likely lead to signicant casualties in the event of an expected 
earthquake. These are the killer buildings that need to be addressed most urgently by new mitigation policies.
Source:  analysis
 
6    
 
 
 
The seismic performance reflected in the above categories depends not only on the performance of the 
building structure  its beams, columns, walls, floors, roofs, and foundations  but also on the equipment 
and systems that are required to keep a building usable and in operation.  Such systems include water and 
sewer systems, gas, electricity, fire sprinklers and alarms, elevators, emergency lighting, heating, 
ventilation, air conditioning, weather-tightness, telephone, and internet.  
For ordinary buildings, current building codes promise no better than Category D performance in the 
expected earthquake.  There will be, however variability in the resulting performance, and while some 
buildings designed to the code will only provide Category D performance, a large number of buildings 
will happen to perform much better.  Thus, even though all buildings are designed to the same overall 
building code seismic criteria, when the expected earthquake ground motion strikes, there will be a 
distribution of resulting performance.  This is illustrated in the bar chart of Figure A.  
Enhancements to seismic design and inspection provisions can be developed to improve the seismic 
performance of new buildings.  As discussed later, targeted building code enhancements could be grouped 
into voluntary provisions that can be certified by labels such as Seismic Silver or Seismic Gold.  Such 
provisions would provide an overall improvement to the seismic performance of a stock of buildings, as 
shown in Figure A. 
 
7    
 
 
REASONS TO REQUIRE IMPROVED SEISMIC PERFORMANCE FOR NEW 
BUILDINGS   
A number of factors support the idea that new buildings in San Francisco should be built for better 
seismic performance than the default level provided by the current building code, which is based on 
nationally applicable codes.  Among U.S cities in areas of very high seismic hazard, San Francisco is 
unique because of its geography, urban density, reliance on public transportation, and susceptibility to 
post-earthquake fires.   
Damage to new buildings and developments can have magnified impacts that affect adjacent structures 
and the citys transportation and utility networks, and can cause cascading economic disruption if 
workplaces or businesses are closed, if exterior cladding has fallen off buildings, or if people cannot 
occupy their homes.  (See Figure 2) 
Interviews with  building owners, occupants, and other stakeholders, conducted for the Peer Tall 
Buildings Initiative, indicate a clear desire for improved seismic performance in new buildings (whether 
tall or not)5.  The interviews did not indicate expected costs of seismic improvement.  As discussed in the 
section on the cost of improvements, such improvement is expected to increase building costs by 3% to 
7% if targeted improvements are made to seismic provisions.  
 
DESIGN AVAILIBLE RESOURCES AND PRECEDENTS FOR MAKING A CHANGE  
Local governments are permitted to impose more restrictive standards than those in the national and state 
codes when this can be justified by local conditions such as seismicity, topography (for example hilly 
terrain), or climate.  San Francisco adopts the California Building Code with modifications for the 
resistance to ground-shaking and hillside construction, as well as some long-standing local provisions for 
new construction.  The San Francisco Building Code is adopted by the Board of Supervisors and 
implemented by the Department of Building Inspection (DBI), which reviews building plans and inspects 
buildings under construction to ensure that the approved plans and codes are followed. 
While jurisdictions like San Francisco typically adopt some changes to the state codes, other jurisdictions, 
notably Los Angeles, have previously imposed substantially stricter seismic requirements in their city 
building code.  Such requirements typically are developed by the local community of earthquake and 
structural engineering professionals.    
 
                                                        
5 PEER 2007 
8    
 
 
 
Figure 1.  San Francisco burns following the 1906 earthquake.  Because initial re ignitions are typically 
caused by building damage or collapse, reducing the amount of damage in the entire building stock would 
reduce the likelihood of re, which in turn would reduce damage to infrastructure, utilities, and buildings, and 
the demands on emergency response.  These types of interrelationships in the citys earthquake resilience 
components support the argument for improving the seismic performance of new and existing buildings.  
 
San Francisco is fortunate that many of the worlds experts in earthquake and structural engineering are 
located in the .  In addition to individual experts, a number of their important professional and 
research organizations are located here.  The Structural Engineers Association of California has an active 
section based in San Francisco.  The Pacific Earthquake Engineering Research Center promotes and 
coordinates research at the leading West Coast universities, including Berkeley and Stanford, and is 
headquartered in Berkeley.  (The center studies the specific problem of designing for earthquakes with 
targeted performance objectives.)  The Earthquake Engineering Research Institute is an international 
organization headquartered in Oakland.  The Applied Technology Council manages applied research in 
earthquake engineering and is based in Redwood City.  The earthquake groups of the United States 
Geological Survey and California Geological Survey are based in Menlo Park.  California has an Office 
of Emergency Services focused on earthquake response that is located in Oakland.   
Having these experts and organizations at our doorstep is a valuable resource in carrying out the 
recommendations described in this paper. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
To help create a city that remains resilient in the face of the inevitable earthquake crisis,  has 
developed one long-term and three near-term recommendations.  
RECOMMENDATION #1  
(Long Term): Establish seismic performance targets for new buildings that allow the City to 
recover quickly from the inevitable strong earthquake.   
 has defined seismic performance goals according to an intended timetable for the citys recovery.  
Table 1 details the performance targets applicable to new buildings.  The targets are ambitious and will 
take proactive efforts and incentives to achieve.  The targets are long-term goals, to be achieved over the 
9    
 
 
next two or three decades.  Among the efforts necessary to achieve these earthquake resilience targets, 
 recommends beginning with the following three near-term actions outlined below. 
RECOMMENDATION #2  
(Near Term): Make near-term improvements to the San Francisco Building Code to provide cost-
effective improvements in seismic performance.   
Improvements can be made to the San Francisco Building Code that should have little cost impact on 
construction, but should lead to improved seismic performance for new buildings.  (See sidebar for 
example improvements.)  The San Francisco Department of Building Inspection should support this 
effort, with the goal that the City should adopt new requirements within two years.  The city should 
engage a group of experts in seismic/structural engineering, construction, and inspection to determine 
how, through specific changes to the building code, particular building systems can be designed to 
achieve better seismic performance.  In this effort, DBI and the city will need to commit to doing more 
than the default standards of national building codes.   
The types of changes envisioned include things such as better quality and reliability in the inspection of 
fire sprinkler installation and their seismic bracing, increased seismic design forces for elevator rails, and 
better column strength requirements in tall moment frame buildings. 
RECOMMENDATION #3 
(Near Term): Declare the expected seismic performance that will be achieved by the current 
Building Code, and develop code provisions that give options for quantiably improved seismic 
performance.   
One way to communicate expected seismic performance and to advocate for improved performance is to 
use a certification system that defines different levels of seismic resistance measures in terms of how 
usable or repairable a building will be after an earthquake. Potentially, a certification system could make 
seismic performance more transparent and allow the marketplace to push for improved seismic 
performance. 
With this understanding, owners may choose to comply with a higher standard of such seismic measures  
- or "provisions" -  because of their own desire for improved seismic performance, and/or because such 
improved seismic certifications have been shown to appeal to buyers or tenants.   
Development and implementation of a seismic performance certification system is challenging because 
(a) the certification system needs to be fair, consistent, and verifiable, and (b) there is inherent uncertainty 
in how a given structure will perform under a given level of earthquake ground motion.   
A certification system for new buildings (i.e., those not yet built) should be different than one for existing 
buildings, although both types of rating systems could be keyed into performance levels such as 
Categories A through E shown above.   One reason to have a separate certification system is that existing 
buildings will generally have a wider range of seismic performance than new buildings, with some 
existing buildings exhibiting much poorer performance than would be expected of a new building 
designed to current codes.  (This is because new buildings are designed to consistent standards, with a 
more reliable knowledge of material properties and construction quality.)   
A more important reason to have a separate certification system is that for new buildings it is possible to 
tie the certification to a set of seismic design provisions with which the structural engineer and owner 
volunteer to comply.  This can lead to a more objective certification system than could ever be developed 
for existing buildings.   
10    
 
 
The goal is that any claim of improved seismic performance in a new building be a valid and certifiable 
claim, based on specific and clear improvements in the seismic design, inspection, and/or construction 
process.   
 envisions a certication system for new buildings that is based on developing targeted 
seismic design provisions, in Building Code language, that give an option for designing for 
improved performance.  The certication system could have two levels, beyond the ordinary 
Building Code requirements: 
 Seismic Silver describes a building meeting the minimum seismic/structural requirements of the 
Building Code plus additional specific provisions, written in building code language, that have 
been developed to provide improved seismic performance.  The target performance for this level 
might be as shown in Figure A85 percent of buildings designed to the Silver provisions would 
achieve Category C or better seismic performance. 
 Seismic Gold would be similar to Seismic Silver except that there would be more stringent 
provisions, which would provide further improvement to seismic performance.  The target 
performance for this level might be as shown in Figure A80 percent of buildings designed to 
the Gold provisions would achieve Category B or better seismic performance. That is, they would 
need some repairs but could be used safely while those repairs were made. 
Some of the targeted provisions for improved seismic performance would depend on the type of structure 
being built. 
Targeted provisions would include inspection and quality control in addtion to design provisions  Quality 
control of building projects is crucial for seismic performance.  Countries with poor quality control in 
construction and structural design typically suffer far more serious damage in earthquakes than they 
otherwise would.   
During construction, quality control incudes inspection of construction activities, and inspection and 
testing of structural materials, elements, and building systems.  Prior to construction, during design, 
quality control incudes thorough checking of the seismic design process and calculations.  Prior to design, 
quality control should also be applied to the planning process, so that seismic criteria appropriate to 
building location and site conditions are developed.  This is especially important for developments 
planned on land that has an increased seismic vulnerability, for example because of soil conditions that 
amplify shaking or cause soil liquefaction. 
Simply calling for more inspections will not necessarily improve seismic performance.  Any proposed 
changes should emphasize improving the quality and reliability of inspections. 
It may be advantageous to also define a Seismic Certified category (below Seismic Silver) that can be 
applied to buildings that meet the 2007 San Francisco Building Code.  The reason is that the rating of new 
building as Seismic Certified would raise awareness of the seismic rating system and ultimately could 
help create a market-based incentive for Seismic Silver and Seismic Gold buidlings as project sponsors 
and prospective homebuyers become aware of the new rating system.  
 
IMPLEMENTING A CERTIFICATION SYSTEM  
The idea of targeted improvements to the Building Code grouped under categories such as Seismic Silver 
and Seismic Gold is a refinement of a concept that already exists in the code.   
The national building standard for structures, ASCE 7 [2005], to which nearly all U.S building codes 
refer, requires more restrictive earthquake designs for certain building types.  The more restrictive 
requirements depend on a categorization of the use that occupies a building and the relative hazards to 
people if the building fails. Occupancy Category II refers to ordinary buildings, Occupancy Category III 
11    
 
 
includes buildings such as schools, jails, utility stations, chemical facilities, and assembly buildings, and 
Occupancy Category IV includes critical buildings such as hospitals and fire and police stations. Category 
I includes buildings that aren't regularly occupied by people or that represent a low degree of hazard if 
they fail.  
Compared to ordinary buildings, Occupancy Category III buildings must be designed for 25% more 
resistance to earthquake forces and 33% more resistance to earthquake caused deformations.  Occupancy 
Category IV buildings, compared to ordinary buildings, must be designed for 50% more resistance to 
earthquake forces and double the resistance to earthquake caused deformations.  
 Requirements For New Buildings: How Much Is Too Much?  
The components of development cost are threefold: construction costs (or hard costs), indirect costs (or 
soft costs) and land cost.  While the proposals in this paper stand to add significantly to the hard costs of 
a project, there are also many soft costs that we, as a city, have determined are important to layer on 
development. These include exactions for public goods such as parks, childcare facilities, libraries and 
affordable housing. 
How much is too much? This is a difficult question to answer. If fees are set too high, we dont get new 
development, thereby propelling new growth into less costly parts of our region. If fees are set too low, 
we lose out on public benefits we might otherwise have been able to receive.  
Many cities, including San Francisco, have commissioned sophisticated studies that seek to determine 
how new fees and regulations change the feasibility of development. Typically, these studies look at the 
impact a new fee or regulation will have on hard costs and soft costs and see how much value is left over 
to pay for land (known as the "land residual.") If the land residual is too low, a landowner is unlikely to 
sell his or her land, and new development wont happen.  
While there is no "bright line" where all development ceases to occur, it is possible to make some gross 
judgments about how new fees and regulations will affect the market as a whole. And that is where 
decisionmakers - such the mayor and the Board of Supervisors - have to start weighing policy options. 
Can we afford green building requirements and new seismic performance requirements? How strict can 
those requirements be before the hard costs become too costly to bear?  Should we reduce our fee burden 
for public benefits in favor of increasing our seismic requirements? 
These are the sorts of questions that decisionmakers need to grapple with. In a city like San Francisco, 
where every sort of public benefit has a built-in constituency, it can be challenging for elected officials to 
find a balance that pleases everyone. Too often, the solution is just to layer more and more requirements 
on new development. Some argue that we have already made certain types of development impossible 
through our cumulative set of requirements.  
 believes that we cannot achieve the goal of enhanced seismic performance by simply layering on 
yet one more cost. We believe that resiliency is an important enough goal that the City should make 
some hard choices to obtain it. This means either rolling back some exactions, changing the timing of the 
payment of exactions or creating other forms of economic incentives that neutralize the added cost of 
building more resilient buildings. 
 
Ideally, all Occupancy Category IV buildings will be fully operational after a large earthquake, although 
currently their expected seismic performance is not explicitly checked to verify that the Building Code 
requirements will provide the desired performance.   
12    
 
 
 recommends a two-phased approach to implementing a rating system. Phase I makes use 
of the Occupancy Category requirements as a starting point for targeted provisions for improved 
performance. Phase II requires the development of targeted specic optional code provisions for 
improved seismic performance. 
PHASE I: USE OCCUPANCY CATEGORY REQUIREMENTS AS A STARTING POINT FOR 
TARGETED PROVISIONS FOR IMPROVED PERFORMANCE 
Absent the development of more targeted provisions under headings such as Seismic Silver and Seismic 
Gold, the existing code requirements for Occupancy Categories III and IV could be used as an objective 
and veriable voluntary standard that provides improved seismic performance.  Such an option has the 
following advantages: 
 Straightforwardness of simply considering larger seismic forces (and stricter limits on seismic 
deformation). 
 Already established in the building code, thus does not require development (by expert engineers 
and architects) of targeted provisions. 
Advantages of instead developing targeted voluntary provisions under headings such as Seismic Silver 
and Seismic Gold include 
 Targeted improvements are likely to provide better seismic performance for less cost increase 
compared to a broad brush approach of increasing seismic forces. 
 Targeted improvements can include improvements to inspection and construction quality control, 
which are not addressed in an approach of only increasing seismic forces. 
 Targeted improvements would be evaluated and developed for specic building and structure 
types, verifying that the improved provisions would be feasible.  
 
PHASE II: DEVELOP TARGETED SPECIFIC OPTIONAL CODE PROVISIONS FOR 
IMPROVED SEISMIC PERFORMANCE 
 recommends that a group of experts develop specific optional code provisions for improved 
seismic performance. These provisions would define the voluntary Seismic Silver and Seismic Gold 
certifications.  Requirements similar to those already in the Building Code for Occupancy Category III 
and Occupancy Category IV buildings can be used as a starting point, although   recommends 
developing more targeted provisions. 
Cost of improved seismic provisions in new buildings 
The cost of designing and building for improved seismic performance will depend on a number of 
variables including the specific design and inspection provisions implemented, material and labor costs, 
the type of structure, and its use.   
A study of the seismic design of equipment and building systems in hospitals compared the unit 
construction costs of a new hospital in California to that for a new commercial building in California.6  
The additional cost of improved seismic provisions for equipment and systems, not including the main 
structure, was estimated to be $14 to $17 per square foot in 2004 dollars, about a 5% increase in 
construction cost according to the report.   
 
                                                        
6 Applied Technology Council, 2003, ATC 51-2, Recommended U.S.  Italy collaborative guidelines for bracing 
and anchoring nonstructural components in Italian hospitals, Redwood City, CA 
13    
 
 COMPARISON TO ANALOGOUS CERTIFICATION AND RATING SYSTEMS 
In considering a rating system for seismic performance, it is helpful to examine analogous rating 
systems that have been successfully used in the building industry and other fields.  
Comparison to LEED certication 
The LEED certification process for environmentally sustainable buildings provides a useful 
comparison.  For new construction LEED certification is awarded at four levels:  Certified, Silver, 
Gold, and Platinum.  The certification level is based on meeting specific requirements to earn points, 
with some requirements being prerequisites, which are required for any level of certification.  
Projects apply for certification using an online system, and fees for certification are based on building 
area.  The Green Building Certification Institute reviews the applications and grants certification 
points and levels. 
The seismic certifications envisioned for new buildings would be simpler to implement than the LEED 
ratings and would not require the extensive validation process, because the additional requirements for 
improved performance would be in building-code language.  Thus the building authority (DBI) could 
check that Seismic Silver or Seismic Gold provisions are met using a process similar to the normal 
structural plan review process.   
Comparison to Probable Maximum Loss ratings 
Probable Maximum Loss ratings have been used by the insurance and lending industries and represent 
the probability that earthquake damage will cause a certain level of loss in a building.  The ratings 
account for the seismic hazard at the location of the building in an objective and accurate way.  The 
ratings typically do not account for local soil conditions, and typically account for structural/seismic 
vulnerability only based on coarse categorizations of building construction types and number of 
stories.   
Considering seismic/structural vulnerability only based on building type and size would not work for 
rating the seismic performance of new buildings.  Such a scheme would encourage only certain 
construction types for buildings.  In reality all construction types permitted in the building code could 
be designed for better seismic performance through specific additional provisions applicable to that 
construction type or to the design deformation or force levels.  The design for better seismic 
performance regardless of construction type is what should be encouraged with a seismic performance 
rating system for new buildings. 
Comparison to vehicle crash test ratings 
Vehicle crash test ratings are provided by a number of organizations including the National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, European New Car Assessment Program, and the Insurance Institute for 
Highway Safety.  The ratings, and the testing behind them, have contributed to great improvements in 
automobile safety over the last five decades.  The ratings have led to safety being a verifiable and 
marketable feature of automobiles.   
Potentially, ratings of buildings could lead to a similar improvement in seismic performance and the 
earthquake resilience of our cities.  However, buildings cannot be tested for earthquakes as easily as 
cars can be crash-tested.  Also, buildings are usually unique rather than being a uniform manufactured 
product like a car, so that safety conclusions will depend on individual building characteristics. 
Overall, the examples discussed above demonstrate the potential value, and some of the challenges, of 
developing a seismic performance rating system for new buildings. 
 
14    
 
 
 
The equipment and systems contributing to this cost increase included ceilings, partitions, fire sprinklers, 
plumbing, ducts, mechanical equipment, electrical systems, cladding, and miscellaneous metals.  The cost 
increase results from the more rigorous seismic design, inspection, and agency review for these systems, 
which is required for California hospitals.   The increase is estimated on a unit cost basis and does not 
include the cost of additional equipment or specialized medical equipment in hospitals compared to 
commercial buildings.  Thus the estimate is applicable to potential cost increases in commercial buildings 
if significantly stricter seismic provisions for equipment and systems are implemented.   
An additional, perhaps equal, increase in construction cost may be incurred in designing the main 
structure of a building for increased seismic forces and stricter deformation limits.  
s own inquiry into potential cost impacts came to similar conclusions.   asked contractors to 
estimate the percentage increase in construction cost that is likely to occur if a building is to be designed 
to the requirements for Occupancy Categories III or IV rather than Occupancy Category II.  The 
contractors estimated that hard cost increases were an average of 5.5% for an increase from Occupancy II 
to Occupancy III and about 11% for an increase from Occupancy II to Occupancy IV7.   One benchmark 
that a contractor used to help formulate their estimate was to consider that one way to meet Occupancy IV 
requirements is to seismically isolate the structure. 
Contractors involved in this study noted that it is critical that improved seismic provisions not lengthen 
the duration of construction, as this would cause further cost impacts.  One contractor also noted that 
some structural systems (for example post-tensioned concrete walls) can potentially offer improved 
seismic performance with no cost increase. 
Phase II of implementing a seismic certication system requires the development of targeted standards for 
Seismic Silver and Seismic Gold.  assumes that Seismic Silver provisions will be somewhat less 
strict (and less costly) than code requirements for Occupancy III buildings (a 3% cost increase as 
compared to a 5% increase).  We also assume that Seismic Gold provisions will be more strict than code 
requirements for Occupancy III buildings, but less strict than those for Occupancy IV buildings (a 7% 
cost increase as compared to a 12% cost increase). This is illustrated in gure 3 (below) 
                                                        
7 Some contractors estimated construction cost increases for Occ II to Occ IV as high as 20%.  
15    
 
 
  
RECOMMENDATION #4 (NEAR TERM): DEVELOP STRONG INCENTIVES THAT 
ENCOURAGE BUILDING TO HIGHER SEISMIC STANDARDS.   
To balance negative impact on project feasibility arising from improved seismic provisions, incentives 
must be provided, other fees and requirements must be reduced and/or the marketplace must be willing to 
pay more for improved seismic performance.  
 recommends that San Francisco should develop strong incentives to encourage developers to 
implement higher performance standards for buildings. This should be done in parallel with the 
development of building code options for improved seismic performance, 
As part of San Franciscos Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety,8 currently under development, a 
range of possible seismic incentives have been identified. These include property tax reduction or 
deferment, transfer tax rebates, fee waivers, zoning incentives, expediting of permits and reviews, and 
permitting the transfer of development rights. 
A. Density Bonuses 
Of the potential incentives, planning incentives may be the most effective option that does not incur 
additional cost to the city.  A relatively straightforward incentive would be to allow additional gross area 
in the zoning approvals by the Planning Department. 
                                                        
8 Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety, Incentives to Encourage Seismic Retrofits:  Options for San 
Francisco, 5 September 2008. 
16    
 
 
Other cities enact legislation that includes development incentives to progress issues that are important to 
the community.  In Sydney Australia, a floor space incentive was enacted as a part of their Living City 
planning controls enacted in the mid-1990s.  The objective for Sydney was to increase the number and 
density of housing units in the city.  The floor space incentive was available to developers for an 
intentionally limited period.  Project sponsors had approximately five years in which to have their 
projects become entitled and commence construction.  After this period, the prior floor space controls 
were re-instated and the incentives were no longer offered.  The incentives worked.  The number of 
housing units rose significantly and the city became a more exciting and livable place to be. .9 
  
Figure 4  Sydney, Australia.  Between 1993 and 2000, as part of the Living City planning 
initiative, development incentives including increased oor area allowances succeeded in 
encouraging downtown residential density. 
 
While modification of zoning height and bulk controls in San Francisco are frequently a subject of debate, 
there appears to be a way to use the existing height bonuses that are in the current zoning controls with a 
slight modification.  In some locations in San Francisco, there is a 10% height bonus for more slender 
buildings.  This has all but never been used and, as such, may be considered ineffective.  A more 
successful scenario may be that a 10% height bonus with the same bulk allowance on lower levels be 
allowed on developments that build to a higher seismic performance.  
 recommends that density bonuses be used as an incentive to encourage developers to build to 
seismic silver and seismic gold standards to enable San Francisco to become more resilient. 
B. Tax Abatement 
Seismic Silver and Seismic Gold projects should be eligible to receive some type of tax abatement. This 
could include property tax abatement, transfer tax abatement or tax abatement for other types of taxes, 
such a payroll taxes for commercial structures.  
C. Reduction in Insurance Costs 
The cost of earthquake insurance is extremely high. The City of San Francisco should work with the 
California Earthquake Authority to ensure that Seismic Silver and Seismic Gold projects are able to 
obtain discounted insurance that reflect their reduced risk based on increased seismic performance. Even 
if earthquake insurance (and thus monthly HOA dues) could be reduced, it is unclear whether prospective 
buyers would pay more upfront in exchange for future operating savings. 
                                                        
9 Sydney:  Planning for the Living City October 2000.  http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public-
/documents/APCITY/UNPAN007491.pdf.  Retrieved 12 November 2008. 
 
17    
 
 
D. Deferred Payment of Public Benet Fees 
Seismic Silver and Seismic Gold projects should be eligible to defer payment of public benefit fees until a 
Certificate of Occupancy is obtained.  
 
CONCLUSION 
It is crucial that San Francisco start preparing now for the inevitable earthquake.   has dened 
overall goals for San Franciscos buildings and infrastructure to remain resilient in such a disaster.  The 
effort requires a view of longer-term goals as dened by , as well as specic actions that should be 
started now.  These actions include declaring and clearly communicating expected seismic performance, 
giving options for quantiably improved seismic performance, making near-term improvements to the 
building code, and developing strong incentives, such as increased height limits, for buildings that meet 
higher seismic standards. 
 
  
 
18    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIFELINES:   
UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO 
ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS 
EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 REPORT 
Adopted by the  Board of Directors  
September 17, 2008 
 
Released 
February, 2009 
The author of this report was Christopher Barkley 
 
www..org 
 
 
Generously  underwritten by Degenkolb Engineers
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
In disaster planning, much attention is paid to the role of buildings  how will they perform in a major 
earthquake? How long will they take to repair? Will people be able to stay in their homes after a quake, or 
will they need temporary shelter? Less attention is paid to the role of the infrastructure systems that 
support urban life, which we call our  lifelines. By lifeline, we mean the utility systems that bring us 
our water, electricity and natural gas and the transportation systems that allow us to get around, including 
public transit, ports and airports, and road infrastructure.  As with buildings, lifelines are critical to our 
ability to recover from an earthquake. If our buildings are not serviceable, nobody can live or work in 
them. San Franciscos capabilities for response to, and recovery from, an earthquake are highly dependent 
on the condition of lifelines in the wake of such a disaster. 
The importance of reducing the risk to lifelines cannot be understated.  Imagine what would happen if 
even one of our lifelines seriously failed in an earthquake. How would people be able to shelter in place 
without drinking water? What happens if our natural gas lines cease to work  or worse  stoke the flames 
of a massive fire? How will emergency workers get to our city if the bridges fail? How will our economy 
recover if we can't move people or goods around the region?  
Lifeline owners in both the public and private sectors have made significant investments in designing, 
constructing, and retrofitting their facilities and systems to reduce the risk of damage in an earthquake and 
to facilitate restoration of services to their customers. However, the seismic performance standards for 
lifelines vary widely and are not tied to generally applicable public policies for reducing risk or for 
ensuring community resilience in the face of a major earthquake. 
We need to know how our lifelines are going to perform in an earthquake. And we need to set 
performance targets based on resilience  i.e. our capacity to recover quickly and effectively from a 
major earthquake. To promote the citys recovery from an earthquake, the services provided by lifelines 
should be restored as quickly as possible  within hours or days. However, as things now stand it may 
take months or even years for some systems to be restored to full operation due to the uncertainties 
associated with potential damage, the lack of clearly articulated goals for restoration, and the lack of 
consistent standards for achieving those goals.  
 The San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Association () has developed this policy paper 
raise awareness of the Citys vulnerability and to encourage steps necessary to increase the Citys 
resilience to a major earthquake, with respect to lifelines. 
This paper is a component of s Seismic Hazard Mitigation Initiative. The initiatives goals 
are to: 
 define the concept of resilience in the context of disaster planning; 
 establish performance goals for the expected earthquake that supports the definition of 
resilience; 
 define transparent performance measures that help the City reach these performance goals; and 
 suggest next steps for implementing policies that improve the Citys resilience. 
 
IMPORTANCE OF LIFELINE SYSTEMS TO A RESILIENT SAN FRANCISCO 
There are a number of reasons why the ability of lifelines to survive or recover from an earthquake is of 
the highest importance: 
 Because lifeline systems spread across the region, they have weak links resulting from site 
specific conditions that increase the risk of partial or complete system shutdowns. For example, 
3    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
the Citys water system includes specific elements that may withstand earthquake damage. 
However, the Citys water is delivered through the Hetch Hetchy system, which transports water 
from the Sierra Nevada through 280 miles of pipeline and 60 miles of tunnels that cross several 
earthquake faults, including the Hayward Fault. Further, the water distribution system within the 
City includes areas subject to differential settlement that could damage mains and service lines.  
 The impact of damage to lifelines is compounded by the interdependency among lifeline sectors, 
both within San Francisco and in the region as a whole. For example, electric power is required to 
run water and wastewater systems, and the airport depends on jet fuel brought in via pipeline 
from petroleum refining and distribution facilities. 
 In addition to supporting first responders, the expedient restoration of lifelines reduces the need 
for evacuation and sheltering of victims who would otherwise be without critical services. 
 The recovery of communities and the economic base is dependent on the re-establishment of 
lifelines. If the services provided by these systems cannot be restored expeditiously, the recovery 
will be delayed as residents and businesses struggle with the lack of critical services and the 
inability to move people and goods around the region.   
 
DESCRIPTION OF LIFELINES 
Lifelines are defined as those essential utility and transportation systems that serve communities across 
all jurisdictions and locales. These systems share the attributes of being distributed systems, rather than 
isolated facilities; and of providing products or services that are transferred through networks that often 
cross legal and jurisdictional boundaries (ALA, 2005).  
 
LIFELINE SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS 
Lifelines include: 
 Water systems  Highways and roads  
 Wastewater systems  Ports and waterways 
 Electric power systems  Transit systems 
 Oil and natural gas systems  Railroads 
 Telecommunications systems  Airports 
 
Hospitals and other medical facilities are often considered to be lifelines; however, these facilities are 
addressed in the Existing and New Buildings papers. 
In general, a lifeline system incorporates a wide range of elements necessary for system operation, 
including linear components; mechanical, electrical, and electronic equipment; buildings containing 
system components; operating centers; and other supporting elements. The circumstances under which 
individual elements may fail vary widely, as do applicable design guidelines and standards. The 
performance of the entire system is as critical as the performance of individual elements; however, 
damage to individual elements may be sufficient to shut down part or all of the system.  
4    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
Lifeline systems are also distinguished by their interdependency. The continued operation of a lifeline 
system, such as the communications network, may be dependent on the operation of another system, such 
as the power system. Similarly, the ability for system owners to restore their respective systems following 
an earthquake may be dependent on the condition of highways and other transportation elements.  
 
LIFELINES IN SAN FRANCISCO 
As a major city, San Francisco is served by all major categories of lifelines, as described in Table 1 
below. (The table includes lifelines that serve the City itself; it does not include lifelines serving the Bay 
Area region as a whole.) 
Table 1: Lifelines Serving San Francisco 
Lifeline System Owner/Operator and Details 
Water and Wastewater San Francisco Public Utilities Commission (SFPUC) 
Systems include the Hetch Hetchy system, which serves not only San Francisco 
but nearly 2 million  customers outside the City; potable water treatment 
and distribution within the City; and wastewater collection and treatment systems 
within the City 
Electric Power Distribution to residential and commercial customers: Pacic Gas and Electric 
Company (PG&E) 
Power generation within the City: Mirant Corporation, which owns and operates the 
Potrero Generating Plant 
Municipal power, including power for transit, streetlights, trafc lights, and 
municipal buildings: SFPUC, which uses the Hetch Hetchy system to generate 
hydropower 
Natural Gas PG&E operates the distribution system within the City, including regulation, high- 
and low-pressure distribution lines, and service lines 
Telecommunications Numerous private sector entities, including AT&T and Verizon 
Systems include telephone, wireless, data, and cable networks 
Highways and Roads Interstate and state highways and the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge: 
California Department of Transportation 
Golden Gate Bridge: Golden Gate Bridge, Highway, and Transportation District 
City streets: The Department of Parking and Trafc is responsible for trafc 
engineering and City-owned parking facilities; the Department of Public Works is 
responsible for street repair 
Ports and Waterways The Port of San Francisco owns all port facilities in the City 
Ferry services are provided by Golden Gate Ferry, Alameda Harbor Bay Ferry, 
Alameda Oakland Ferry, Vallejo Baylink, and various private sector ferry operators1 
Transit Systems Bus, metro, and street car lines in San Francisco: Municipal Railway (MUNI) 
 Rapid Transit (BART) 
Other major bus systems serving San Francisco: Alameda-Contra Costa Transit; 
San Mateo County Transit; and Golden Gate Transit 
Railroads Caltrain: Peninsula Corridor Joint Powers Board 
5    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
Lifeline System Owner/Operator and Details 
Airport San Francisco International Airport 
1 
Under state law, the Water Emergency Transportation Authority is slated to take over the operation of some of these ferry systems 
and is responsible for implementing regional improvements that will increase capabilities for use of the ferry system for response to 
regional disasters. 
 
While some of these systems (such as MUNI and the Port) are wholly contained within San Francisco, 
most are part of larger regional networks, such as the regional freeway system; and the failure of these 
larger systems would paralyze San Francisco as well as the region. Additionally, San Francisco is 
critically dependent on lifelines within the region, but outside of the City. For example, finished 
petroleum products are either delivered by pipeline from outside the region or manufactured in the region 
from crude oil imported to the region; and damage to these systems would result in a shortage of gasoline, 
diesel, and aviation fuel. Interdependencies among systems will increase their respective vulnerabilities to 
shutdowns, regardless of level of damage or location.  
 
POTENTIAL RISKS TO LIFELINES 
The potential risk to lifelines varies widely, depending on the sector, the relative age of the system, the 
location of individual system elements and site-specific conditions at those locations, and the extent to 
which the system in question is vulnerable due to damage to lifelines in other sectors. Site-specific 
conditions that increase vulnerability to lifelines in the  include the following. 
 Ground shaking: Ground shaking due to the earthquake may damage system elements or 
associated features (such as buildings in which lifeline elements are located). 
 Liquefaction: Many of the s lifelines, such as ports and airports, are located in areas on 
the perimeter of the San Francisco and San Pablo bays that are susceptible to lifeline-damaging 
conditions related to liquefaction, such as lateral spreading and differential settlement. 
 Displacement along faults: Key lifelines, such as the Hetch Hetchy system and major 
transportation elements, cross the Hayward Fault and other faults in the . 
 Landslides: Lifeline components may be displaced or closed due to earthquake-triggered 
landslides. 
The 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake provides the most recent example of widespread impacts of an 
earthquake to lifeline systems in the . Examples of impacts to lifelines are described in Table 2 
below. 
Table 2: Examples Impacts of the Loma Prieta Earthquake on  Lifelines 
Lifeline System Example Impacts 
Water Approximately 1,200 breaks in water mains and connections in the  
Damage to the Municipal Water Supply System in the Marina District resulted in 
total loss of ow to customers and re hydrants, and required replacement of over 
36,000 feet of pipe  
Damage to Auxiliary Water Supply System reduced water supply available for 
reghting in the Marina District 
Wastewater Damage to collector sewers in the Marina District required replacement of nearly 
6    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
Lifeline System Example Impacts 
7,000 feet of pipe 
Electric Power Damage to two power plants (Hunters Point and Moss Landing) and ve 
substations 
Natural Gas Damage to low pressure mains in the Marina District required replacement of over 
42,000 feet of pipe 
Over 150,000 customers reported to be without gas service; approximately 90 
percent of shutoffs were customer-initiated 
Highways and Roads 80 bridges closed 
$2 billion in damage to bridges and roads 
Collapse of upper deck section on eastern span of the Bay Bridge 
Collapse of Cypress Street Viaduct (Interstate 880) with 42 deaths 
Ports and Waterways The Port of Oakland experienced deformed rail lines, tilted container cranes, and 
cracked wharf piles, but remained in operation 
Transit Systems Disruption to BART and MUNI due to power outages 
Airports San Francisco International Airport closed for 12 hours to repair damage to control 
tower  
3,000 feet of runway damaged at Oakland International Airport 
Sources: U.S. Geological Survey, 1992, 1993, 1998; Disaster Recovery Journal, 1989; California Seismic Safety Commission 
(CSSC), 2002. 
 
ADDITIONAL HAZARDS ASSOCIATED WITH NATURAL GAS SYSTEMS 
As described in Section 1 above, the failure of lifeline systems can have widespread and enduring effects 
on services critical to the response, public health and safety, re-establishment of the community, and 
economic recovery. Just as significant are the risks of additional damage and injury resulting from lifeline 
failures  in particular, the potential for fires caused by damage to natural gas systems. Gas leaking from a 
damaged line may ignite or explode, either because the gas supply is not shut off or is restored despite the 
existence of leaks that have not been detected and repaired. Approximately 35 percent of fires in San 
Francisco following the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake were gas-related; and 55 percent of fires in the Los 
Angeles area following the 1994 Northridge Earthquake were gas-related (CSSC, 2002). Gas supplies 
may continue to flow to users following an earthquake, unless the provider shuts down the system or 
individual customers shut off the supply at the interfaces between the supply system and buildings (such 
as closing a shutoff valve at a residence).  
Currently, San Francisco does not require automatic shutoff valves for gas lines as they enter buildings; 
and in many cases in San Francisco the gas pressure step-down is located adjacent to, or within the 
footprint of, the building. Consequently, the potential exists for gas leaks within damaged buildings, often 
under high pressure, increasing the risk of ignition.  
 
THE RISK OF MUCH STRONGER EARTHQUAKES 
With a magnitude of 7.1 and a fault rupture in a remote location 60 miles from San Francisco, the Loma 
Prieta Earthquake had far less impact on San Francisco than large earthquake events that are anticipated 
7    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
to occur closer to the City. As described in the Overarching Policy Paper, a reoccurrence of the magnitude 
7.9 1906 San Andreas Fault Earthquake could result in regional losses of $150 billion, or 10 times the 
total losses from the Loma Prieta Earthquake. Although many lifeline owners have made substantial 
investments in seismic retrofits and upgrades since Loma Prieta, it is likely that damage to lifelines, and 
the and corresponding disruption to immediate response and long term reconstruction would be far 
greater  even to the point of inhibiting San Francisco's ability to ever fully recover. The possibility of 
such an earthquake in the near term heightens the urgency with which the City should address the 
vulnerability of lifelines. 
 
SEISMIC PERFORMANCE OF LIFELINES 
Guidelines, standards, and code requirements for the seismic performance of lifelines vary widely. The 
range of functions and designs of these systems, as well as the range of potentially damaging hazards, 
necessitates sector- and hazard-specific approaches to reducing damage, ensuring safety, and facilitating 
system restoration. Consequently, development of these standards occurs among numerous code 
development entities, other professional organizations and private sector entities, and Federal, state, and 
local government agencies. These entities have made great strides in developing standards to reduce risk 
to lifeline systems in all sectors.  
Most sectors have progressed to system-based approaches in order to assess risk and reduce disruptions 
the performance of systems and delivery of services to customers. Nevertheless, achieving a consistent 
level of resilience is complicated by the many different regulating bodies to which system operators must 
answer.  The general tendency toward sector- and hazard-specific development of standards results in the 
following problems: 
 A lack of commonly understood definitions for acceptable seismic performance. 
 Different standards for performance among different sectors. 
 A lack of inter-sector coordination for the development of standards, setting of priorities, and 
implementation of mitigation. 
 Limited understanding by political leadership and the general public of the potential performance 
of lifelines during an earthquake  and whether the performance of lifelines will meet 
expectations. 
The sector-specific natural hazards provisions are generally based on varying levels of risk (for example, 
in terms of the design earthquake or probability of occurrence). Additionally, most sectors do not have 
standards for reliability  that is, practices that have been developed to ensure system restoration in 
accordance with goals set by stakeholders. According to the ALA, such standards have been developed 
only for highways/roads, ports, and railroads (ALA, 2004). 
 
RESILIENCE IN THE CONTEXT OF LIFELINES 
As described in the Overarching Policy Paper,  defines San Franciscos seismic resilience as the 
Citys ability to: 
 Contain the effects of earthquakes when they occur.  
 Carry out recovery activities in ways that minimize social disruption. 
 Rebuild following earthquakes in ways that mitigate the effects of future earthquakes.  
 
8    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
EXPECTED PERFORMANCE OF LIFELINES FOR RESILIENCE 
 recommends the establishment of clear, readily understood performance goals that define 
resiliency in infrastructure. Goals for the restoration of service are expressed in terms of the percentage of 
customers that have service after an earthquake.  
Table 3  Expected Performance for Lifelines 
Category Goals for Service Restoration 
I Resume 100 percent of service within 4 hours, with backup systems if 
necessary 
Critical response facilities - including emergency housing centers  need to be 
supported by utility and transportation systems critical to their success. This level of 
performance assures that these systems will be available within four hours of the 
disaster. It requires a combination of well built buildings and systems, provisions for 
making immediate repairs as needed, and redundancy within the networks that 
allows troubled spots to be isolated.  
 
II Establish control of the system and resume 90 percent of service within 72 
hours; resume 95 percent of service within 30 days; and resume 100 percent of 
service within four months 
Housing and residential neighborhoods require utility and transportation systems be 
restored quickly so that these areas can brought back to livable conditions. There is 
time to make repairs to lightly damaged buildings and replace isolated portions of 
the networks or create alternate paths for bridging around the damage. There is time 
for parts and materials needed for repairs to be imported into damaged areas. These 
systems need to have a higher level of resilience and redundancy than the systems 
that support the rest of the city. 
 
III Resume 90 percent of service within 72 hours; 95 percent of service within 
30 days; and 100 percent of service within three years 
 
The balance of the city needs to have it's systems restored as buildings are repaired 
and returned to operation. There is time to repair and replace older vulnerable 
systems with new. Temporary systems can be installed as needed. Most existing 
lifeline systems will qualify for Category III performance. 
 
 
 
 
These goals assume the occurrence of the expected earthquake, defined as an earthquake that can 
reasonably be expected to occur once during the useful life of a system. For San Francisco's buildings, 
this earthquake is defined as having a 10 percent chance of occurrence in 50 years. As described in the 
Overarching Paper, "The Resilient City: Defining what San Francisco needs from its seismic mitigation 
policies", a magnitude 7.2 earthquake on the peninsula segment of the San Andreas Fault would produce 
this level of shaking in most of the City. Since lifeline systems generally serve cities and regions for well 
over 100 years, a larger "expected" earthquake should be considered.  
9    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
Categorizing  lifelines in a meaningful way will require an assessment of those lifelines that are most 
critical to response and recovery. For example, Category I lifelines, which must be restored to service 
within 4 hours, would include those systems that are critical to the immediate response to an earthquake 
such as: 
 water supply and electrical power to critical response facilities; 
 water supply for firefighting; 
 emergency communications systems; and 
 critical transportation elements, such as roads to critical facilities and ferry landings. 
This categorization may take into account the partial restoration of systems necessary to achieve the 
performance goals, rather than the complete restoration of those systems. For example, back-up systems 
may be implemented to restore services to critical facilities within the desired time frame and 
redundancies or bypasses in areas where ground failure is likely would allow for the restoration of 
services once control of the system has been established. 
Additionally, the restoration of the transportation system may be achieved by shifting capacity among 
modes of transportation and among different providers. If damage to roads and bridges cannot be repaired 
within the timeframes described above, the capacity of other forms of transportation, such as buses, 
ferries, and rail systems, may be increased beyond pre-earthquake capacities to accommodate the 
additional load. In addition to measures necessary to reduce potential damage to transit facilities, this may 
require such mechanisms as modifications to equipment, establishment of service in areas previously not 
served by specific systems, or implementation of incentives for mass transit use and restrictions on 
vehicle travel that encourage use of transit systems. 
 
GOALS FOR RESILIENCE OF LIFELINES 
 proposes to clarify the level of damage that is acceptable and suggest requirements to improve 
performance to achieve the level of resilience required. Goals for resilience of lifelines, as expressed in 
terms of target states for recovery, are provided in Tables 4a  4d below. 
Table 4a  Target States for Recovery Within 4 Hours of the Earthquake 
Lifeline System Target State Within 4 Hours 
Municipal Water Water service or temporary supplies available to 100 percent of facilities critical to 
Supply System response 
Auxiliary Water Supply Water available for reghting in 100 percent of City neighborhoods 
System 
Electric Power Power restored, or temporary power available to, 100 percent of facilities critical to 
response 
Natural Gas Establish immediate control of the system and shut off service to quadrants in 
which damage is likely to be signicant and result in hazardous conditions 
Telecommunications Telephone, wireless, and data service restored to 100 percent of facilities critical to 
response 
Highways and Roads All City-identied priority routes open and accessible to responders, assessment 
teams, and repair crews 
Port of San Francisco Critical ferry facilities available for transportation of rst responders and evacuations 
10    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
 
Table 4b: Target States for Recovery Within 3 Days of the Earthquake 
Lifeline System Target State Within 3 Days 
Municipal Water Water service restored to 90 percent of customers 
Supply System 
Wastewater Wastewater service restored to 90 percent of customers 
Electric Power Power restored to 90 percent of customers 
Natural Gas Restore service to 95 percent of customers in non-liquefaction areas 
Telecommunications Telephone, wireless, and data service restored to 90 percent of customers 
Highways and Roads All initial bridge safety evaluations completed; 90 percent of bridges open to trafc 
Port of San Francisco Initial safety evaluations of all ferry facilities completed; 90 percent of ferry capacity1 
restored 
Transit 90 percent of MUNI capacity1 restored 
90 percent of BART capacity1 restored 
Railroads Capability to use Caltrain lines for transportation of rst responders, evacuation, and 
transportation of relief supplies restored 
San Francisco Airport open for emergency trafc and evacuation ights 
International Airport 
1 Although systems may be operational and available for transportation services, personnel and equipment may be diverted to emergency response priorities. 
Table 4c: Target States for Recovery Within 30 Days of the Earthquake 
Lifeline System Target State Within 30 Days 
Water, Wastewater, Electric Power, Service restored to 95 percent of customers 
and Telecommunications 
Natural Gas Service restored to 95 percent of customers, including those in 
liquefaction zones 
Highways and Roads 90 percent non-priority routes in the City open to trafc 
Port of San Francisco Ferry service provided at 125 percent of pre-earthquake capacity 
Transit Service restored for 90 percent of MUNI customers 
Service restored for 90 percent of BART customers 
Railroads Service restored for 90 percent of Caltrain customers 
San Francisco International Airport Airport open for commercial trafc 
 
 
 
11    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
Table 4d: Target States for Recovery 4 Months and Beyond 
Lifeline System Target State and Timeframe 
Water, Wastewater, Electric Power, Service restored to 100 percent of customers within 4 months 
Natural Gas, and 
Telecommunications 
90 percent of highways and roads in the City restored to capacity within 
Highways and Roads 
4 months 
Transit systems providing service equivalent to 125 percent of capacity 
Transit 
within 4 months 
All Lifelines Complete restoration within 3 years 
 
As described in Section 2 above, damage to natural gas systems heightens the risk of secondary incidents 
(fire or explosion) if gas supplies continue to flow to users in the presence of damaged system elements. 
Consequently, resilience of natural gas systems must account for the critical need to control the system in 
the wake of an earthquake, in addition to ensuring that system components are designed to reduce the risk 
of damage. The model for mitigation of the seismic risk to natural gas systems must expand to include 
both reliance on appropriate action at the interface with the customer and management of the system in 
such a way that risk can be controlled on system-wide basis after the earthquake and service restoration 
proceeds in a safe, orderly fashion. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 recommends that the City implement a seismic mitigation program for lifelines through the 
following measures.   
 
1. ESTABLISH A LIFELINES COUNCIL TO PROVIDE A MECHANISM FOR 
COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING. 
 The mayor should convene a Lifelines Council to: 
 Establish standards for resilience in cooperation with the lifeline providers. 
 Prioritize actions related to lifelines.  
 Coordinate planning across sectors. 
 Develop a comprehensive approach to coordinating the recovery of lifelines following an earthquake. 
 Foster partnerships with regional, state, and private sector entities to improve lifeline performance in 
the City and across the region. 
 Lead City efforts to pursue changes at the state and national levels regarding standards and 
requirements for lifeline performance. 
 Given the expense of necessary upgrades to enhance resilience, develop a funding plan for 
modifications to City-owned systems and for assisting other system owners with modifications in 
areas of overwhelming public interest.  For example, future bond issues proposed by the City should 
include components of the required work. 
12    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
The Council should include representatives of city departments and agencies with responsibility for 
lifeline sectors in the City, such as the SFPUC and MUNI; as well as departments who have a 
coordinating role. It should also include state, regional, and private sector entities that operate or regulate 
lifelines serving San Francisco, as well as risk and industry experts. The Council should be chaired by a 
representative of the Mayors Office, and its actions should be directed by an appointed leader who is 
given the authority, responsibility, and resources for delivering required results.  
The Council should articulate the plan for implementing the additional recommendations described 
below.  
 
2. CONDUCT A SEISMIC PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF LIFELINES IN SAN 
FRANCISCO AND ESTABLISH PRIORITIES FOR LIFELINE MITIGATION.  
With the guidance of the Lifelines Council and with the cooperation of lifeline system owners, the City 
Controllers Office should conduct an assessment of the expected performance of lifelines, using the 
performance during the expected earthquake as the standard. This published study should inform the 
planning work being undertaken by the Lifelines Council. The assessment in each sector should: 
 Be predicated on the concept of resilience and the need to achieve the desired timeframes for system 
recovery following earthquakes. 
 Be conducted according to procedures set by the applicable standards organization or regulatory 
agency, such as the guidelines for implementing performance assessments published by the ALA. 
 Account for ongoing programs for seismic mitigation. For example, SFPUCs ongoing initiative to 
upgrade the Hetch Hetchy system and the California Department of Transportations program to 
retrofit bridges may result in levels of performance sufficient to meet the Citys goals.  
 Result in a preliminary report to the Board of Supervisors within six months, and a full report within 
two years. 
 Be updated on a regular, yet reasonable, basis (every five years) to account for system improvements 
and the evolution of technology, design, and construction techniques. 
The audit should enable San Francisco to establish priorities for modifications necessary to improve the 
seismic performance of lifelines. The Council should present these priorities to the Board of Supervisors 
and to the Citys Capital Planning Committee. Priorities would be established by: 
 Identifying lifeline systems or components of systems by performance category, as described in 
Table 3. 
 Determining whether the lifelines can meet these targets, based on the assessment described in 
Recommendation #2 above. 
 Establishing targets for modifications necessary to achieve performance goals. 
 The prioritization should emphasize higher standards for life-safety, including: 
 Reducing the risk of fires due to damage to natural gas and electrical systems. 
 Protecting the water supply for fire-fighting. 
 Ensuring that lifelines can support response operations. 
This prioritization would take into account whether the City has the capability to make improvements 
(such as with City-owned systems) or mandate improvements through code requirements or other 
mechanisms; or must work through state and Federal regulatory agencies. 
13    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
 
3. REQUIRE IMPROVEMENTS TO CITY-OWNED AND REGULATED SYSTEMS 
NECESSARY TO MEET PERFORMANCE GOALS AND DEVELOP A FUNDING 
PROGRAM TO MAKE THOSE IMPROVEMENTS HAPPEN. 
The City has direct control of several major lifeline systems, such as the water and wastewater systems, 
the port, the airport, and Muni. Consequently, the Lifelines Council should recommend to the Board of 
Supervisors that the departments that operate these systems incorporate into their capital improvement 
plans the mitigation measures necessary to achieve performance goals. 
For those systems that the City regulates through code requirements or other mechanisms, the Lifelines 
Council should recommend that the governing body require the improvements necessary to meet system-
specific performance goals.  
  
4. REQUIRE THE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF IMPROVEMENTS TO THE 
GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM THAT REDUCE THE RISK OF POST-EARTHQUAKE 
IGNITIONS.  
Among lifeline systems, the gas distribution system is unique in that damage to the system has the 
potential for creating secondary impacts  ignitions and explosions  that could cause significant damage 
and loss of life. However, a complete shutdown of the gas distribution following an earthquake is not 
practical, given that resumption of service could take months, significantly delaying the Citys recovery. 
Similarly, an unnecessary shutdown of the system in a moderate earthquake would have a devastating 
effect on the City's economy. Consequently, the City must undertake both near- and long-term actions to 
ensure that the gas distribution system ultimately incorporates features that reduce the risk of secondary 
impacts without compromising the continued operation of the system after earthquakes.  
In the near-term (within 5 years), improvements to the gas distribution system should address those 
areas with the highest risk, including liquefaction zones and areas with a high concentration of buildings 
in which a high-pressure gas line enters the building. To meet the short term goal, the City should require:  
 An assessment of areas and buildings that represent significant risk.  
 Right-sizing of shutdown zones to target areas of significant risk.  
 Installation of automated shutoff mechanisms to reduce risk of ignition in target areas. This 
component would include installation of shutdown mechanisms for the delivery system by PG&E and 
installation of shutoff valves by building owners.  
The City should support the effort to assess risk. Additionally, through requirements for existing 
buildings and new construction, the City should strive to reduce the potential for building collapses, 
thereby reducing the potential for damage to gas lines entering buildings (refer to the Existing Buildings 
and New Buildings papers for discussion regarding buildings). 
In the long-term (within 30 years), the City should sponsor the development and implementation of an 
improved, automatic gas distribution monitoring and control system that will allow effective control of 
the entire system following earthquakes without any risk of unnecessary shutdown and with the capacity 
to restart and avoid significant delays to recovery.  
14    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
  
5. ESTABLISH PARTNERSHIPS WITH REGIONAL, STATE, AND PRIVATE SECTOR 
ENTITIES TO ADDRESS MULTI-JURISDICTIONAL AND REGIONAL SYSTEMS. 
The multi-jurisdictional and regional nature of many of the lifeline systems that serve the  will 
compel San Francisco to work with other local jurisdictions, regional entities, state agencies, and private 
sector entities. Examples include the Metropolitan Transportation Commission; the Golden Gate Bridge, 
Highway, and Transportation District; BART; Caltrain; the Water Emergency Transportation Authority; 
and PG&E. In some cases, San Francisco has representation on the governing bodies that oversee these 
systems, but in other cases, it will be necessary to develop these partnerships. 
 
6. ESTABLISH A PROGRAM FOR COMMUNICATIONS AND OUTREACH TO 
REGIONAL, STATE, FEDERAL AND PRIVATE SECTOR ENTITIES TO DRIVE 
CHANGE. 
San Francisco does not have the authority or capability to regulate many of the lifeline systems that are 
critical to achieving resilience. Consequently, the City should establish a communications and outreach 
program to advocate for those changes that are in the Citys self-interest while at the same time setting the 
standard for a comprehensive approach to addressing lifeline performance. Elements of this program, 
which would be coordinated by the Lifelines Council, should include the following: 
 Raising the profile of public expectations for seismic performance of lifelines. By establishing readily 
understood measures for desired performance, San Francisco can communicate its goals to political 
leadership and the public more effectively, thereby encouraging demand for change. Additionally, 
this effort would encourage the public to accept increases in the costs of service that would be 
necessary to implement programs to improve lifeline performance. 
 Enhancing cross-sector communication in planning for, and responding to, earthquakes in San 
Francisco. The interdependencies among lifelines may create post-incident circumstances in which 
decisions that are often made unilaterally may have critical and widespread implications. The City 
should work to increase the rapid and efficient exchange of information to promote the development 
of a common operating picture for lifeline systems and allow individual sectors to make decisions in a 
coordinated fashion.  
 Developing recommendations for sector-specific organizations and state and Federal regulatory 
agencies. San Francisco should participate more actively in efforts by lifeline sectors to further the 
development of guidelines and standards, tools, and mechanisms for communication.  
 Influencing the development of requirements at the state and national levels. San Francisco should 
work with the appropriate standards and regulatory organizations to encourage the adoption of 
standards for performance based on the Citys model the development of requirements to achieve 
those standards. Further, San Francisco should work with the state regulatory agencies, such as the 
California Public Utilities Commission, as well as the legislature to drive requirements that will result 
in implementation by lifeline owners. 
 
15    
LIFELINES: UPGRADING INFRASTRUCTURE TO ENHANCE SAN FRANCISCOS EARTHQUAKE RESILIENCE 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
American Lifelines Alliance (ALA). Protecting Our Critical Infrastructure: Findings and Recommendations from the 
American Lifelines Alliance Roundtable. 2005. 
ALA. Matrix of Standards and Guidelines for Natural Hazards. 2004. 
California Seismic Safety Commission. Improving Natural Gas Safety in Earthquakes. Publication SSC-02-03. 
2002. 
Disaster Recovery Journal. The Loma Prieta Earthquake: Impact on Lifeline Systems, adapted from Volume 3, 
No. 2. 1999. 
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). The Loma Prieta, California, Earthquake of October 17, 1989  Marina District, 
USGS Professional Paper 1551-F. 1992. 
USGS. The Loma Prieta, California, Earthquake of October 17, 1989  Lifelines, USGS Professional Paper 1552-A. 
1998. 
USGS. The Loma Prieta, California Earthquake of October 17, 1989  Highway Systems, USGS Professional Paper 
1552-B. 1998. 
USGS. Seismicity of the United States, 1568-1989. 1993. 
 
 
16    
REPORT              01/ 2012
Safe Enough
to Stay
What will it take for San Franciscans 
to live safely in their homes after an 
earthquake? A signicant amount 
of housing may be too damaged 
to live in while its being repaired. 
Residents may leave. And that will 
put the citys recovery at risk. Heres 
how to prevent San Francisco from 
losing its most important asset: its 
people. 
1
Safe Enough to Stay 
   3 Executive SummaryThis report is generously funded by the U.S. Geological Survey 
and Degenkolb Engineers. 
  4 Summary of Recommendations
This  report was reviewed, debated and adopted by the 
   5 What will it take for San Franciscans to live    Board of Directors on November 16, 2011.
  safely in their homes after an earthquake?Shelter-in-Place Task Force: 
Christopher Barkley, URS Corporation
   6 Section I: Jack Boatwright, U.S. Geological Survey
  How much of San Franciscos housing David Bonowitz, Structural Engineer**
  needs to meet shelter-in-place standards? Mary Comerio, Professor of Architecture, University of California.  
  Berkeley
Bryce Dickinson, Rutherford and Chekene
 22 Section II:  Laura Dwelley-Samant, Consultant**
  What engineering criteria should be Lucas Eckroad, Department of Emergency Management, City and    
  used to determine whether a home has     County of San Francisco
  adequate shelter-in-place capacity?David Friedman, Forell/Elsesser Engineers Inc. 
Laurie Johnson, Laurie Johnson Consulting | Research
Keith Knudsen, U.S. Geological Survey
26 Section III:  Laurence Korneld, Earthquake Safety Implementation Program, 
  What needs to be done to enable residents   City and County of San Francisco**
  to shelter in place for days and months after Joe Maffei, Rutherford and Chekene
  a large earthquake?Mike Mieler, Doctoral Candidate, University of California, Berkeley
Steven Murphy, Seifel Consulting
John Paxton, Real Estate Consultant
31 Section IV:  Chris Poland, Degenkolb Engineers*
  Applicability to other jurisdictionsDavid Schwartz, U.S. Geological Survey
Heidi Sieck, Kennedy School of Government
32 Appendix I Debra Walker, Building Inspection Commission, City and County of 
  Impacts of the expected earthquake on    San Francisco
  San Franciscos neighborhoods  * Task Force Chair
** Subcommittee Chair 
36 Appendix II  
  Establishing a pre-earthquake shelter-in-   staff: 
Sarah Karlinsky,  Deputy Director 
  place evaluation engineering standard
Interns: 
42 Appendix III  Amy Dhaliwal, Pacic Earthquake Engineering Research Center  
  Establishing a post-earthquake alternative John Pham, Pacic Earthquake Engineering Research Center
  shelter-in-place housing standardDesign: EXBROOK, with contributions by Noah Christman 
Cover photo by California Emergency Management Agency

654 Mission Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
tel. 415.781.8726
info@.org
2   Report > January 2012
 Report
Executive Summary  
Safe Enough to Stay
When a major earthquake strikes the , the region could face thousands of 
casualties, hundreds of thousands of displaced households and losses in the hundreds of 
billions of dollars. The lives of San Franciscans will be enormously disrupted, and it could 
take months to reestablish essential services. Recovery will be slow and will depend on 
the extent of the building damage, the amount of business lost, the availability of utilities 
and how quickly communities can repair and rebuild their housing. 
This report focuses on the last of these factors: housing. San Francisco has a limited 
number of emergency-shelter beds, and its capacity to provide interim housing after an 
earthquake is constrained due both to low vacancy rates and to minimal vacant land. 
Therefore, we believe the city should take steps now to ensure that most of its residents 
can shelter in place  i.e., stay in their own homes while they are being repaired 
 after a major earthquake. Estimates show that only 75 percent of the citys current 
housing stock will provide adequate shelter for residents after a large earthquake. This 
means San Francisco is at risk of losing its most important asset: its people. 
Our research indicates that for San Francisco to avoid a slow and arduous recovery, 95 
percent of its housing must be able to meet shelter-in-place standards. The steps the city 
needs to take to reach this goal will not happen overnight;  estimates that it will 
take several decades to achieve the goal of becoming a resilient city. In this report, we 
ask three important questions about San Franciscos housing resiliency:
t )PXNVDIPG4BO'SBODJTDPTIPVTJOHOFFETUPNFFUTIFMUFSJOQMBDF
 standards?
t 8IBUFOHJOFFSJOHDSJUFSJBTIPVMECFVTFEUPEFUFSNJOFXIFUIFSBIPNF
 has adequate shelter-in-place capacity?
t 8IBUOFFETUPCFEPOFUPFOBCMFSFTJEFOUTUPTIFMUFSJOQMBDFGPSEBZT
 and months after a large earthquake?
In answering these questions, our Shelter-in-Place Task Force has developed a set of 
detailed recommendations to help San Francisco achieve 95 percent shelter in place and 
become a truly resilient city.
                                          Report > January 20123
Summary of Recommendations
s recommendations for creating resilient housing in  
San Francisco
1. Adopt recovery targets for the housing  6. Build on s engineering criteria 
sector as a whole, based on what is proposal to further develop shelter-in-place 
necessary for citywide resilience in a large evaluation criteria for voluntary, mandatory 
expected earthquake.and triggered seismic work on residential 
Our denition of large expected earthquake and the buildings. 
methodology behind our recommended recovery target 
are explained on page 7.7.  As draft criteria are developed, generate 
new loss estimates to help inform planning 
2. Implement the Community Action Plan activities.
for Seismic Safety (CAPSS) recommended 
mandatory soft-story retrot program.8.  Create a San Francisco interdepartmental 
Soft-story and other vulnerable building types are shelter-in-place task force.
dened on pages 20 and 21.
 9. Prepare and adopt regulations that allow 
3. Develop a soft-story retrot program for for the use of shelter-in-place habitability 
smaller soft-story buildings.standards in a declared housing-emergency 
period.
4. Develop retrot programs for other 
vulnerable housing types that impact San 10.  Develop a plan for implementing a shelter- 
Franciscos resilience and also have the in-place program.
potential to severely injure or kill people.
11.  Develop plans for neighborhood support 
5. Focus on developing an interim-housing centers to provide necessary help for 
strategy for the city.shelter-in-place communities.
 
4   Report > January 2012
Safe Enough to Stay
What will it take for San Franciscans to live 
safely in their homes after an earthquake?
When a major earthquake strikes the , the region could 
face thousands of casualties, hundreds of thousands of displaced What Does It Mean to Shelter in Place?
households and losses in the hundreds of billions of dollars. The  denes shelter in place as a residents ability to remain in 
lives of San Franciscans will be enormously disrupted, and it could his or her home while it is being repaired after an earthquake   
take months to rebuild the city and reestablish essential services. not just for hours or days after an event, but for the months it may 
Recovery will be slow and will depend on the extent of the building take to get back to normal. For a building to have shelter-in-place 
damage, the amount of business lost, the availability of utilities and capacity, it must be strong enough to withstand a major earthquake 
how quickly communities can repair and rebuild their housing.without substantial structural damage. This is a different standard 
than that employed by the current building code, which promises 
This report addresses the question of how to make San Franciscos only that a building meets Life Safety standards (i.e., the building 
residential buildings resilient in the face of a large earthquake. How will not collapse but may be so damaged as to be unusable). A 
many San Franciscans will be able to stay in their homes while those shelter-in-place residence will not be fully functional, as a hospital 
homes are being repaired? What does it mean for the citys overall would need to be, but it will be safe enough for people to live in it 
resilience if some neighborhoods suffer more damage than others? during the months after an earthquake. While utilities such as water 
What steps can city government, building owners and residents take and sewer lines are being repaired and reconnected, residents who 
now to ensure that homes are safe to occupy after an earthquake are sheltering in place will need to be within walking distance of a 
strikes?neighborhood center that can help meet basic needs not available 
within their homes. 
Housing is only one element in the complex web of factors that 
contribute to the citys earthquake resilience, but we believe it is an include the mandated retrot of soft-story wood-frame multifamily 
especially important one. Currently, the seismic resilience of the citys housing, the adoption of a mitigation program for critical non-ductile 
housing stock is a weak link. Nearly all of the citys housing predates concrete buildings and an assessment of the citys unreinforced 
modern building codes. For a variety of reasons, residences are rarely masonry program.2 (See Seismically Vulnerable Structures: An 
seismically retrotted. In contrast, many large commercial properties Engineers Rogues Gallery, on page 20, for descriptions of these 
and government facilities have been seismically retrotted in recent building types.)
decades. 
In this report, we dene the steps that need to be taken to 
Housing is linked to every other aspect of the citys recovery: ensure that San Franciscans will be able to shelter in place. The 
Businesses, neighborhood districts, schools and cultural institutions recommendations of this report are structured in three sections that 
all rely on residents being in the city. Many businesses and seek to answer the following questions:
educational activities will be able to resume as soon as the Internet 
and electricity are up and running. (Typically these services resume 1.  How much of San Franciscos housing needs to meet shelter-in-
within weeks of a disaster, long before water, sewer or transportation place standards?
systems can be repaired.) If people can stay in their homes, they will 2.  What engineering criteria should be used to determine whether 
be better able to put their energy and resources into rebuilding their a home has shelter-in-place capacity adequate for a major 
neighborhoods. If they must leave the city, their resources will go earthquake?
with them, perhaps permanently. 3.  What needs to be done to enable residents to shelter in place 
for days and months after a large earthquake?
In prior reports,  focused on dening targets for the recovery of 
San Franciscos buildings and lifelines (i.e., electricity, water, sewer, In the nal section of the report, we describe how the 
communications and transportation systems) after an expected recommendations that have been developed in the previous three 
earthquake of magnitude 7.2.1 We set a target that 95 percent of sections can apply to other jurisdictions.  
residences should achieve a shelter-in-place standard, meaning that 
residents would be able to remain in their homes while those homes 1  See page 7, Dening the Expected Earthquake, for an explanation of this 
metric.
are being repaired. We also made a series of recommendations to 
2  : (, 
strengthen existing buildings, new buildings and lifelines. These 2008). www..org/publications/library/report/dilemma-existing-buildings
                                          Report > January 20125
Safe Enough to Stay 
Section I:Economic recovery and housing recovery are interdependent. If 
employers choose to leave the city or region, they take jobs with 
How much of San Franciscos them. If residents leave, the workforce that employers rely upon is no 
longer available, leading to further disinvestment. Young and mobile 
housing needs to meet shelter-residents, such as high-tech workers who have not yet established 
deep ties to the community, may leave after the earthquake if the 
in-place standards? characteristics that attracted them to San Francisco  exciting jobs, 
an active cultural life and a vibrant social scene  are no longer in 
place. Keeping San Franciscos workforce from leaving is key to the 
 denes seismic resilience as the ability of the city to contain citys economic recovery. 
the effects of earthquakes when they occur, to carry out recovery 
activities in ways that minimize social disruption and to rebuild It is also crucial that San Francisco plan for its most vulnerable 
following earthquakes in ways that mitigate the effects of future populations: low-income households, the elderly, non-English 
earthquakes. The more quickly a community can rebound from a speakers and the disabled. It is clear that some residents will suffer 
major event, the more resilient the community.more severe consequences than others if they are displaced from 
their homes by an earthquake. Wealthy residents have options: 
A critical component of resilience is that residents choose to remain They can stay in a hotel in the short term, nd rental housing for 
in the city during the recovery period. There are many factors that the medium term, secure loans, begin repairs on buildings they 
determine whether a resident will chose to stay after a disaster or pick own before insurance payments come through, and purchase 
up and leave the city. Residents may be able to cope with no water replacements for personal items that they lost. Low-income residents 
or sewer services for a few weeks, but most will be unwilling to put can do few of these things. They will rely heavily on city shelters and 
up with these difculties for a period of months. Similarly, if roads, services. Many of them may leave, unable to afford new rental units 
bridges or public transportation systems are not fully functional, in a market with reduced availability. 
residents may need to relocate in order to commute to jobs and 
schools. The closure of schools, medical facilities or businesses could For low-income property owners, selling damaged property may be 
affect residents decisions about whether to stay in town or leave San more feasible than obtaining nancing and undertaking repair and 
Francisco. Some residents may leave right away and then return as reconstruction. Middle-class residents, already tightly squeezed by 
their fears subside, when their toilet works again or as they complete San Franciscos expensive real estate market, will also have difculty 
repairs to their property. Others may stay initially but will leave as staying in the city. Elderly residents will be heavily affected. Seniors 
they learn how slowly their neighborhoods will be rebuilt. Some of all income levels, but particularly seniors on a xed income, 
residents who leave may develop ties in their new community and will nd it difcult to relocate, repair or rebuild their homes and 
never return. reestablish needed social services and networks. A large earthquake 
could permanently alter city demographics and increase the pace of 
The availability of housing, jobs and community resources such as change in many neighborhoods. San Franciscos diversity and culture 
schools is critical to a citys seismic resilience. We assume that if two will be threatened if vulnerable populations leave due to lack of 
out of these three resources are in place, residents will choose to affordable and accessible housing. 
stay. For example, if a resident can shelter in place in her home and 
her employer has chosen to remain in the city, she is more likely to 
stay than if her employer has left the city or if she is unable to remain 
in her home. 
While this report is focused on one factor  housing  there is 
no doubt that other factors are also important to recovery. San 
Franciscos downtown is a major regional job center, home to more 
than 250,000 jobs. About 42 percent of these downtown workers 
live in San Francisco, and about 38 percent commute from the East 
Bay. Many of San Franciscos major employers (such as PG&E, Wells 
Fargo, the Gap, Charles Schwab, Macys West, Levis and McKesson) 
have corporate headquarters or signicant numbers of employees in 
San Franciscos downtown core. These employers, along with smaller 
ones, represent important sectors of the San Francisco economy that 
will be key to recovery: public utilities, tourism, and hospitality and 
business services. 
6   Report > January 2012
Why 95 percent is the right Dening the Expected 
shelter-in-place targetEarthquake
Its not easy to determine how much housing in a city can be Earthquakes are commonly reported in terms of their Richter 
damaged by an earthquake before the citys viability is undermined. magnitude. That measure was dened in the early 1940s 
We conducted the following analysis to determine what shelter-in-and is useful only for quantifying the energy released overall 
place performance target makes sense for San Francisco.by a single earthquake. It offers little information in terms of 
how buildings or infrastructure will fare or how they should be 
1.  We researched the existing capacity for short-term housing designed. 
(shelter beds) and medium-term or interim housing (hotel rooms, 
trailers) in San Francisco after a large earthquake.In order to evaluate an existing facility or design a new one, 
2.  We reviewed efforts by others to model and quantify disaster earth scientists and engineers today use different measures to 
resilience.quantify the intensity of the expected shaking at a specic site. 
3.  We analyzed how housing damage in recent relevant disasters These engineering measures account for the possible effects 
affected community resilience. of different earthquakes on multiple faults, and therefore are 
dened in probabilistic terms. For example, a building might 
Based on our analysis of the best available data, we conclude that be designed for the level of shaking expected to occur with 10 
95 percent is an appropriate goal. While this may seem to be a high percent probability over a 50-year time period. 
target, the lessons from recent disasters show that losing more than 5 
percent of housing stock is likely to lead to substantial outmigration, A third way of dening earthquakes involves scenario events: 
which could slow recovery for years. The citys lack of interim-housing specic hypothetical earthquakes dened by the location of 
capacity and its relatively low vacancy rate will only exacerbate this the fault rupture and the magnitude of the energy released. 
situation. Scenario earthquakes are especially useful for citywide or 
 regional planning. They are easier to grasp than probabilistic 
San Franciscos emergency-shelter and interim-measures and therefore are effective for communicating 
housing capacityearthquake risk to policymakers and the public. 
San Franciscos Department of Emergency Management estimates 
that its top shelter capacity is 60,000 people, or roughly 7.5 percent In 2003, the San Francisco Department of Building 
of San Franciscos overall population. Sheltering 60,000 people Inspections Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety chose 
would require maximizing shelter space at large convention facilities four scenario earthquakes as the basis for its planning and 
like the Moscone Center and also mixing in some outdoor or soft-mitigation programs. For the purposes of dening resilience, 
sided shelters to supplement indoor space. If we were to use indoor  uses one of these scenario earthquakes: a magnitude 
facilities only, without the big convention centers or outdoor sites, 7.2 earthquake on the peninsula segment of the San Andreas 
capacity would be reduced to 45,000 people, or roughly 5.5 percent Fault, off San Franciscos western shore.
of San Franciscos population.3 
We refer to this scenario as the expected earthquake because 
Emergency-shelter beds will provide places for residents to stay for an event of this magnitude can be expected  conservatively 
days or weeks, but it will take years before most heavily damaged but reasonably  to occur once during the useful life of a 
housing will be usable again. In the meantime, residents will need structure or system, and more frequently if the structure is 
to nd interim housing before repairs on damaged housing are renovated to serve more than one or two generations. Of 
completed or new replacement housing is constructed. There are course, this dened scenario would produce different levels of 
federal and state plans and guidelines that identify a variety of options shaking at different locations, but for most of the city its effects 
for interim housing and priorities for their use.4  would be similar, in probabilistic terms, to those with a 10 
percent chance of occurring over a 50-year period.
In general, these plans call for a hierarchy of actions: rst, providing 
We dene resilience in terms of this expected earthquake. 
3  Email correspondance with Robert Stengel, Department of Emergency Other earthquakes are possible, of course. In a smaller, more 
Management, September 1, 2011.
routine earthquake, buildings would be expected to perform 
4  National Disaster Housing Strategy and Annexes (Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, 2009); 2009 Disaster Housing Plan (Federal Emergency better (i.e., to withstand the shaking with little or no damage). 
Management Agency, 2009); and Regional Catastrophic Earthquake Interim In a more extreme event, residents would have to tolerate more 
Housing Plan: Annex to the San Francisco  Regional Emergency damage than what we project here.
Coordination Plan (California Emergency Management Agency, 2011).
                                          Report > January 20127
Safe Enough to Stay 
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division
ickr user kosmosxipo
Emergency shelter after the San Franciscos 1906 earthquake (top) and Kobes 1995 earthquake (bottom).
federal rental vouchers to displaced residents to pay for existing disaster such as a magnitude 7.2 earthquake, neighboring cities and 
housing resources such as vacant rental units and hotel and motel counties will also be struggling to house displaced residents, adding 
rooms in and near San Francisco; second, aiding in the provision pressure to the regions housing stock. Thus, San Franciscans may 
of traditional interim-housing forms such as Federal Emergency face the same challenges as New Orleanians did after Hurricane 
Management Agency (FEMA) trailers that might be located in front of Katrina and may have to travel far to nd available housing. 
damaged residences, public parks, the rights-of-way of wider streets, After Katrina, New Orleans displaced residents had to move 
or any larger tracts of undeveloped lands; and third, using innovative temporarily to Baton Rouge, Atlanta, Houston and Dallas, all great 
forms of interim housing, which might include cruise ships docked distances from the city. This made it difcult for residents to keep their 
along the waterfront or vacant commercial space. jobs, repair and rebuild their homes, and restore their communities. 
All of these options present problems for San Francisco. Even In 2011, San Franciscos Department of Emergency Services 
without a disaster, there is a limited supply of vacant housing in San initiated a post-disaster interim-housing planning process to set local 
Francisco, and using the citys hotels to house displaced residents priorities for interim housing and determine how many people could 
will need to be balanced with accommodating workers who come to realistically be accommodated in the various interim-housing options. 
repair the city and tourists who help to restore the economy. There The citys objectives for the post-disaster interim-housing planning 
are few undeveloped spaces in the city, and lling parks and streets effort6 are to: 
with trailers for too long will present transportation, recreation and 
economic challenges. t ,FFQSFTJEFOUTJOUIFJSIPNFT
t *GOPUJOUIFJSIPNFT
UIFOLFFQSFTJEFOUTJOUIFJSOFJHICPSIPPET
If existing housing, hotel space or land for trailers is not available, t *GOPUJOUIFJSOFJHICPSIPPET
UIFOLFFQSFTJEFOUTJOUIFDJUZ
then the regions disaster housing plans call for relocating displaced t *GSFTJEFOUTMFBWFUIFDJUZ
UIFOIBWFBQMBOGPSUIFJSSFUVSO
residents to nearby counties and cities.5 However, in a regional 
8   Report > January 2012
After a magnitude 7.2 earthquake on the San Andreas Fault, role in community resilience and that it is linked to many other 
approximately 85,000 households (about 25 percent of the citys aspects of recovery. However, none clearly state how robust a 
households7) could need interim housing for several months, communitys housing needs to be to achieve resiliency, and we can 
gradually decreasing to 45,000 households (approximately 13 draw no conclusions from the resilience literature about whether 
percent) by two years after the earthquake, with up to 15,000 s performance target for housing is reasonable.
households (approximately 5 percent) requiring interim housing for 
up to ve years.8 Clearly, emergency-shelter beds will not be able to Recent comparable disasters
accommodate this scope of displaced population in the short term, Perhaps the best way to investigate whether a goal of 95 percent 
and interim-housing options will not easily accommodate such large shelter in place is reasonable for San Francisco is to consider how 
numbers for the months and years that housing takes to be repaired other communities fared after major disasters. Every disaster is 
and replaced. The insufciencies of both these capacities suggest the different, but reviewing case studies of recovery from similar cities 
city should strive to keep as many residents as possible in their own provides insights into what San Francisco might experience after 
homes after a large earthquake. While no specic number emerges, a damaging earthquake. By looking at these case studies, we are 
our review supports s long-term goal of 95 percent of residents interested in examining how damage to housing affected the overall 
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Divisionbeing able to shelter in their current homes. recovery of each community. We are also trying to understand not 
only how quickly a city or region can rebuild housing units, but 
Other performance metrics related to disaster whether the rebuilding serves the population that was displaced by 
resiliencethe disaster or serves a new population. As such, we are attempting 
San Francisco is not the only community looking at its resilience and to correlate housing damage with outmigration after the disaster.
capacity to rebound following future disasters. Both in the United Some past events are more relevant to San Francisco because 
States and around the world, researchers and policymakers are they were urban events in developed countries, where the quality 
leading efforts to develop the means of measuring and monitoring of construction and housing conditions were similar to those in an 
community resilience. While there is no single set of established American city like San Francisco. Other events, due to the scale of 
indicators or frameworks for quantifying disaster resilience, there the event or the circumstances in the locale, were not appropriate 
is growing consensus that resilience is a multifaceted concept comparisons. Figure 1 (page 10) summarizes the impacts from 
with social, economic, institutional, infrastructural, ecological and several disasters. While the number of uninhabitable housing units 
community dimensions.9 Several sets of resilience indicators or ranges between 1 and 50 percent in these examples, it is clear that 
attributes have been developed as a means of comparing resiliency in even when the loss of housing units is less than 10 percent, the time 
a community over time or measuring recovery progress and outcomes to repair or rebuild uninhabitable housing units is long and can inhibit 
following a disaster.10 Most consider community functions  recovery.11 In the absence of adequate interim housing, outmigration 
infrastructural, economic and social  in a manner similar to s is inevitable and the loss of population will impact the local economy 
Resilient City recovery performance indicators; however, none are as and overall recovery. We see permanent loss of population, and the 
specic as s goals (e.g., 95 percent of residents able to shelter accompanying social and economic impacts, in communities where 
in place after the expected earthquake). housing losses are as low as 5 to 10 percent.
10   Literature reviewed includes: Bruneau, Michel, Stephanie E. Chang, Ronald 
All of the metrics examined recognize that housing plays an important T. Eguchi, George C. Lee, Thomas D. ORourke, Andrei M. Reinhorn, Masanobu 
Shinozuka, Kathleen Tierney, William A. Wallace and Detlof von Winterfeldt, 
5 Regional Catastrophic Earthquake Interim Housing Plan: Annex to the A Framework to Quantitatively Assess and Enhance the Seismic Resilience of 
San Francisco  Regional Emergency Coordination Plan (California Communities, Earthquake Spectra 19 (4) (November 2003): 733752; Toward 
Emergency Management Agency, 2011).a Common Framework for Community Resilience. (Oak Ridge, TN: Community 
6  Johnson, Laurie and Lucas Eckroad, Summary Report on the City and County and Regional Resilience Institute, 2009); Cutter, Susan L., Christopher G. Burton 
of San Franciscos Post-Disaster Interim Housing Policy Planning Workshop. and Christopher T. Emrich, Disaster Resilience Indicators for Benchmarking 
(San Francisco Department of Emergency Management, July 11, 2001).Baseline Conditions, Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency 
Management 7 (1) (2010): Article 51, 120; LeDuc, Andre, Establishing 
7  There are approximately 330,000 households in San Francisco. The estimate Mitigation as the Cornerstone for Community Resilience (Eugene, OR: Partners 
of 85,000 households comes from analysis of CAPSS Hazus output data. See for Disaster Resistance and Resilience, 2006); Miles, S. and Stephanie E. 
Figure 4. Chang, Modeling Community Recovery from Earthquakes, Earthquake Spectra 
8  Johnson, Laurie and Lucas Eckroad, Summary Report on the City and County 22 (2) (May 2006): 439458; Norris, Fran H., S.P. Stevens, B. Pfefferbaum, 
of San Franciscos Post-Disaster Interim Housing Policy Planning Workshop (San K.F. Wyche and R.L. Pfefferbaum, Community Resilience as a Metaphor, 
Francisco Department of Emergency Management. July 11, 2001.)Theory, Set of Capacities, and Strategy for Disaster Readiness, American 
9  Peacock, Walter G., William H. Hooke, Susan L. Cutter, Stephanie E. Chang Journal of Community Psychology 41 (12) (March 2008): 127150; Twigg, 
and Philip R. Berke, Toward a Resiliency and Vulnerability Observatory Network: John, Characteristics of a Disaster-Resilient Community: A Guidance Note 
RAVON (Texas A&M University Hazard Reduction and Recovery Center, College (Aon Beneld UCL Hazard Research Centre, November 2009) www.abuhc.org/
of Architecture, 2008); National Research Council, Committee on Private-Public Publications/CDRC%20v2%20nal.pdf 
Sector Collaboration to Enhance Community Disaster Resilience, Building 11 The recovery time varies depending on what kind of housing was lost (e.g., 
Disaster Resilience Through Public-Private Collaboration. (Washington, DC: apartments and low-income units typically take longer than middle-income 
National Academies Press, 2010).single-family homes).
                                          Report > January 20129
Safe Enough to Stay 
Figure 1: Comparing the Effects of Recent Disasters
Loma Prieta Earthquake (1989),12 San Francisco 
Uninhabitable units11, 5 0 0
Uninhabitable units as a percentage More than 1% in Oakland and San Francisco, 10% in Watsonville and 
of housing in the affected areaSanta Cruz
Percentage of uninhabitable units 60%
that were in multifamily buildings
Outmigration More than 1,000 left Santa Cruz/Watsonville area; Oakland reported 
2,500 new homeless; similar numbers assumed for San Francisco
Housing reconstruction time frameTwo years for single-family and most market-rate apartments; seven to 
10 years to replace/repair affordable housing units in three counties
Degenkolb Engineers
Hurricane Andrew (1992),13 Miami
Uninhabitable units80,000
Uninhabitable units as a percentage 6% in South Dade County
of housing in the affected area
Percent of uninhabitable units that 29%
were in multifamily buildings
OutmigrationPermanent dispersion of 25,000 to 30,000 households (21,000 jobs 
lost with Homestead base closure, which exacerbated outmigration)
Housing reconstruction time frame75% of single-family units in two years; very limited multifamily housing 
reconstructed
ickr user fotogake
Northridge Earthquake (1994),14 Los Angeles
Uninhabitable units60,000
Uninhabitable units as a percentage 3% in San Fernando Valley, 1.5% in Los Angeles
of housing in the affected area
Percent of uninhabitable units that 88%
were in multifamily buildings
OutmigrationMinimal: people rehoused in vacant units due to pre-earthquake 9.3% 
vacancy rate
Housing reconstruction time frame80% in two years; typically two years to repair and four years to rebuild 
damaged housing units
ickr user standardpixel   
12 Data from Comerio, Mary C., Disaster Hits Home (Berkeley, CA: University of 18  Recovery Brieng Book, Grand Forks, North Dakota: Flood Recovery 
California Press, 1998).Brief, Informational Resources and Recovery Lessons Learned (City of Grand 
13  Ibid.Forks, North Dakota, 2006); Information on City Governance, 1997 Flood 
Preparations, Damage and Recovery, (City of Grand Forks, North Dakota, 
14  Ibid.2008).
15  Data from Olshansky, Robert B., Laurie A. Johnson and Kenneth C. Topping, 19  Data from Olshansky, Robert B. and Laurie A. Johnson, Clear as Mud: 
Opportunity in Chaos: Rebuilding After the 1994 Northridge and 1995 Kobe Planning for the Rebuilding of New Orleans (Chicago, IL and Washington, DC: 
Earthquakes (2005) www.urban.illinois.edu/faculty/olshansky/chaos/chaos.html. American Planning Association, 2010).
Additional data estimates from Professor Mary Comerio, UC Berkeley. 
20  This is the number of uninhabitable units for New Orleans. The total number 
16  Data estimate from Professor Mary Comerio, UC Berkeley.of uninhabitable units in the Gulf Coast region is 500,000.
17  Note that the January 2005 population exceeded pre-earthquake levels, 21   Data from Professor Mary Comerio, UC Berkeley.
but population distribution changed. Four western Kobe wards (Tarumi, Suma, 
Nagata and Hyogo) had smaller populations; for example, Nagata ward was only 
at 80 percent of its January 1995 population.
10   Report > January 2012
Kobe Earthquake (1995),15 Kobe, Japan
Uninhabitable unitsNearly 450,000 housing units either partially or completely destroyed; 
about 400,000 people left at least temporarily homeless; more than 
316,000 people in public shelters 
Uninhabitable units as a percentage 24% of housing units destroyed in the six central urban wards of the 
of housing in the affected areacity of Kobe, and approximately 15% in the whole city, including some 
suburban areas
Percent of uninhabitable units that Approximately 50%16  
were in multifamily buildings
OutmigrationIn October 1995 (nine months after the earthquake), Kobes population 
had declined by nearly 100,000 people, a drop of 6.3%17 
japan
_
hReconstruction time frameLimited housing construction in the rst two years after the earthquake; 
ser mave to 10 years to reach and exceed the citys rebuilding goal; about 
200,000 units were built, roughly double the citys goal 
ickr u
Grand Forks Flood (1997),18 Grand Forks, North Dakota
Uninhabitable units9,000 households displaced for several weeks; 1,200 homes 
permanently uninhabitable
Uninhabitable units as a percentage About 80% short-term units and about 10% permanent units
of housing in the affected area
Percent of uninhabitable units that 10%
were in multifamily buildings
Outmigration6% of population lost in rst year
Housing reconstruction time frameMost housing rebuilt in two to three years
ickr user GreenLight Designs (jwgreen)
Hurricane Katrina (2005),19 New Orleans
Uninhabitable units100,000 units damaged or destroyed20  
Uninhabitable units as a percentage 50% of all New Orleans households; 9% to 21% loss of population by 
of housing in the affected areaneighborhood (with some as high as 49%)
Percent of uninhabitable units 43%
occupied by renters
Outmigration80% of residents initially evacuated; after ve years, New Orleans 
population had returned to 80% of its pre-Katrina levels; however, this 
includes signicant in-migration of new residents
Housing reconstruction time frame13% fewer units in city in 2010 and vacancy rate now 25% (pre-storm 
rate at 12%)
ickr user www.nola.com
Christchurch Earthquakes (2010 and 2011),21 Christchurch, New Zealand
Uninhabitable unitsApproximately 15,000 homes will not be allowed to rebuild
Uninhabitable units as a percentage 2% to 3% of Christchurch and surrounding districts
of housing in the affected area
Percent of uninhabitable units that Negligible; probably less than 1%
were in multifamily buildings
OutmigrationTotal outmigration could be roughly 30,000 (six to eight months after 
the 2011 event); could increase as families resolve insurance claims 
Housing reconstruction time frameToo early to evaluate
Sri Sritharan
                                          Report > January 201211
Safe Enough to Stay 
Several relevant lessons for San Francisco emerge from the less, such as those seen in the Christchurch earthquakes, Hurricane 
experiences of disasters in other communities:Andrew, and the Northridge and Loma Prieta earthquakes, also 
contribute to a range of undesirable outcomes. These include large 
1. Rebuilding housing takes a long time, even if the percentage of losses of population, large job losses, protracted time frames for 
units rendered uninhabitable is relatively small. It took at least two rebuilding and heavy impacts on affordable housing. 
years for a signicant portion of housing to be replaced in all of the 
proled disasters for which information was available. It took much After examining this data, we believe that San Francisco would 
longer to rebuild in some communities. After the 1995 earthquake in experience signicant consequences even if only 5 percent of its 
Kobe, Japan  an area often cited to be similar to the   it housing units were unusable after a future earthquake, given the 
took the city ve to 10 years to reach its rebuilding goals.citys low vacancy rates, density and limited capacity for interim 
housing. If more housing were damaged, the potential social and 
2. Multifamily and affordable housing is much more difcult economic consequences could be devastating. 
and slower to replace than single-family, market-rate housing. 
Financing and legal issues are some of the many factors that slow We conclude that s performance target of 95 percent shelter in 
down this work. After the s Loma Prieta earthquake in place is appropriate. 
1989, it took seven to 10 years to replace all of the damaged 
affordable housing. If lost, some affordable housing might never be 
replaced, leading to a signicant shift in post-event population. How will San Franciscos 
3. Large losses of housing lead to permanent losses of population. neighborhoods be impacted by 
The table includes two events with housing losses greater than 25 
percent: Hurricane Katrina and the Kobe earthquake. Both of these the expected earthquake? 
events caused large population losses and demographic shifts. 
However, a number of events where housing losses were much San Franciscos housing will be heavily damaged after future large 
smaller  such as the Christchurch earthquakes in New Zealand and earthquakes. San Franciscos Department of Building Inspection 
Hurricane Andrews impacts in Florida  produced large losses in recently completed a major study  the Community Action Plan 
population as well.for Seismic Safety (CAPSS)24  that analyzed earthquake risk for 
the citys privately owned buildings, including housing. The CAPSS 
4. Interim housing matters. After the 1994 Northridge earthquake project estimated that after a magnitude 7.2 earthquake on the San 
in Los Angeles, most of the people displaced were able to relocate Andreas Fault, approximately 25 percent of the citys housing units 
nearby due to the areas pre-earthquake 9.3 percent vacancy rate. would not be safe for residents to occupy.25 In other words, we 
Vacant rental units served as interim housing. In San Francisco, the currently expect 75 percent of residences to be available for sheltering 
vacancy rate is typically much tighter, currently 4 percent,22 meaning in place after the expected earthquake. This means that residents of 
that the city will need more active measures to house its displaced more than 85,000 units would need to seek alternate housing until 
residents over longer periods. their units are repaired or replaced, which would take years.
 
It is clear that very large housing losses, such as those that occurred  has rened the CAPSS estimates of housing damage so 
after the Kobe earthquake and Hurricane Katrina, devastate a that they could be reported in greater detail by neighborhood and 
community and lead to a slow, difcult recovery. Studies following 
23 Enarson, Elaine, Alice Forthergill and Lori Peek, Gender and Disaster: 
major disasters in the United States, Japan and elsewhere have Foundations and Directions, Chapter 8 in Handbook of Disaster Research (New 
shown that individuals and families enduring interim and irregular York, NY: Springer, 2007); Tatsuiki, Shigeo, Long-Term Life Recovery Processes 
housing situations for months and years after a disaster are more Among Survivors of the 1995 Kobe Earthquake: 1999, 2001, 2003, and 2005 
vulnerable to physical, social and mental disorders, including suicide, Life Recovery Social Survey Results, Journal of Disaster Research vol 2., no. 6 
(2007): 484501.
substance abuse, and physical and verbal abuse.23 However, even 24  For more information about CAPSS, see www.sfcapss.org. 
without catastrophic losses, the disaster case studies included in 
25  This estimate considers damage from ground shaking and liquefaction, 
the table also show that housing losses on the order of 5 percent or but does not include effects of res sparked by earthquakes. Fire damage 
after earthquakes varies signicantly based on conditions at the time, such as 
weather, wind and damage to re-ghting resources. CAPSS ran multiple post-
earthquake re scenarios, varying these and many other conditions. On average, 
more than 70 res would be expected to ignite after an event this size, burning 
22  Data from Reis, Inc. as quoted in U.S. Housing Market Conditions: Pacic 8.7 million square feet of building space that had not already been destroyed by 
Regional Report, HUD Region IX  1st Quarter 2011. www.huduser.org/portal/shaking. About two-thirds of all building space in San Francisco is residential. 
regional.html. Vacancy rates are continuing to tighten due to high demand from Assuming that about two-thirds of the burned area is in residential buildings, 
growing employment sectors, potentially exacerbating interim-housing needs nearly 6,000 additional units are projected to be lost to re, although losses 
should a disaster strike.could be much higher or lower.
12   Report > January 2012
Figure 2: Liquefaction and Landslide Zones in San Francisco
Certain parts of San Francisco are vulnerable to seismic hazards after an earthquake, including 
liquefaction (where wet ground is shaken to the point that it behaves like a liquid) and landslide (when 
a slope becomes unstable).
 
Source: Seismic Hazard Zones, City and County of San Francisco, (California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, November 17, 2000) http://gmw.consrv.ca.gov/shmp/download/pdf/ozn_sf.pdf
1 mile
Liquefaction
Areas where historic occurence indicate a potential for 
permanent ground displacements.
Earthquake-Induced Landslides
Areas where previous occurrence of landslide movement 
indicate a potential for permanent ground displacements.
                                          Report > January 201213
Safe Enough to Stay 
Figure 3: How Will the Expected Earthquake Impact San Francisco?
Different neighborhoods have different housing stock and soil conditions, which means the degree of earthquake 
damage will vary across the city. After a Magnitude 7.2 earthquake on the San Andreas Fault, we expect the 
percentages of housing in red to be unusable, meaning not safe enough for residents to shelter in place.
Marina
50%  
50%  North Beach
27%  
26%  73%  
Pacic Heights74%  
RichmondDowntown
Western Addition27%  
35%  
27%  73%  
65%  
73%  
Central Waterfront27
28%  
Mission
Sunset
72%  
23%  25%  
75%  
77%  Twin Peaks
17%  Bayview
16%  
83%  
Merced84%  
Excelsior
24%  Ingleside
12%  
76%  11%  88%  
89%  
Sources: SFGIS, Census 2000 and  analysis of CAPSS Hazus Output Data
1 mile
Unusable Units25%  
75%  Usable Units
14   Report > January 2012
Figure 4: How Much of San Franciscos Housing Will Be Unusable? 
In neighborhoods with a high number of vulnerable housing types, such as wood-frame soft-story 
buildings and non-ductile concrete buildings, there will be a greater number of unusable housing units 
after the expected earthquake.
NeighborhoodTotal number Number of Percent of unusable units by structure type
of unitsunusable units
One- and Woodframe Concrete built Other
two-family soft-story with before 1980
woodframe three or more 
soft-storyunits
Bayview9,0001,50042%55%1%2%
Central Waterfront9,4002,70015%48%22%14%
Downtown54,00015,0002%53%28%16%
Excelsior24,0002,90058%38%0%4%27
Ingleside7, 9 0 090076%15%0%8%
Marina7, 6 0 03,80015%79%3%3%
Merced8,2002,00016%33%28%22%
Mission48,00012,00023%71%3%3%
North Beach26,0007, 2 0 05%85%6%4%
Pacic Heights19,0004,80012%80%5%3%
Richmond27,0009,40027%71%1%1%
Sunset38,0008,60051%44%1%4%
Twin Peaks17,0 0 02,90040%56%1%3%
Western Addition41,0 0 011,0 0 012%81%4%3%
Tot al330,00085,00022%67%6%5%
Sources: SFGIS, Census 2000 and  analysis of CAPSS Hazus Output Data
structure type.26 However, this analysis only considers part of The analysis makes clear that housing in every San Francisco 
the picture: whether housing will be safe to occupy considering neighborhood would be damaged heavily by a magnitude 7.2  
earthquake damage to structures. It does not consider other damage 26  Dening building performance in terms of shelter in place is a new concept. 
or cascading consequences, such as damage to utilities or structural The CAPSS project used the best information and methods available at the time 
damage from res following the earthquake. The factors that to estimate the amount of housing that would be usable after an earthquake. 
contribute to whether residents choose to stay or leave after a disaster This task force has developed improved methods to identify which residences 
could be used to shelter in place, but this new approach has not yet been 
are complex, and the structural safety of residences is only one piece applied to San Franciscos building stock. The analysis presented in this report 
of information, albeit an important one. This should be kept in mind is based on the CAPSS analysis. We are hopeful that an improved analysis will 
while reviewing the following gures, which only represent that one be conducted some time in the future using the methods developed by this task 
piece.force, producing updated and rened estimates of housing damage.
27  Hazus is FEMAs methodology for estimating damage and losses for natural 
disasters.
                                          Report > January 201215
Safe Enough to Stay 
San Andreas earthquake. In every neighborhood in the city, more Downtown
than 10 percent of the housing units would become unsafe to In addition to the downtown nancial district, CAPSS denes this 
occupy. The neighborhoods that will see the most damage are those district as including the Tenderloin, the south slope of Nob Hill, much 
with large numbers of multifamily buildings, which are generally more of SOMA and most of Chinatown. Encompassing some of the oldest, 
vulnerable than smaller residences, and those that have signicant densest and most historically rich parts of the city, the downtown 
areas of soft or liqueable soils, which can experience magnied area contains approximately 54,000 
shaking and ground failure. (See Figure 2, page 13.) Figurehousing units, the largest number of any 54,000 
3 (page 14) shows estimates of the percentage of unsafe units in district, in addition to housing more than Housing units
all districts. Estimates suggest that the Marina district would be hit 250,000 of San Franciscos jobs. It is also 15,000 
hard, with nearly half of housing units there unsafe to occupy. The the citys least afuent district, measured Units rendered unusable
Richmond district would also suffer signicant amounts of damaged by median household income, with large by the expected earthquake
housing, with an estimated 35 percent of units unsafe to occupy due concentrations of single-room occupancy 
to the type of housing in the neighborhood and its proximity to the buildings and other types of affordable housing. Many elderly people, 
San Andreas Fault.new immigrants and non-English speakers live here. After the 
expected earthquake, nearly 15,000 housing units downtown (27 
Known structural deciencies are behind this predicted damage. percent) would be rendered unusable. Approximately half of these 
Wood-frame soft-story residences with three or more units would units are in wood-frame soft-story buildings with three or more units; 
account for two-thirds of the housing units citywide that could not the rest are located in non-wood structures, including older concrete-
be occupied. Typically, a soft-story building has large openings at frame buildings and retrotted unreinforced masonry buildings that 
the ground level, such as garage doors or store windows, and few are still vulnerable. These non-wood structures are particularly 
interior walls, making the ground oor much weaker and more problematic because some of them house a large number of units 
exible than the stories above. In an earthquake, the ground level can and they can be difcult and costly to retrot. Housing losses in this 
sway excessively and collapse. Construction patterns are different district would be expected to displace many lower-income residents 
in various parts of the city, so the types of structures responsible for who would depend heavily on city services after the disaster. 
housing damage would vary by district, as shown in Figure 4 (page 
15). 
In the expected earthquake, all neighborhoods would experience 
heavy damage, but some would see more housing loss than others. 
Estimated housing losses range from 11 percent in the Ingleside 
district to an alarming 50 percent in the Marina. The following 
sections explore what some of the consequences of this housing 
damage might be in selected districts with large housing losses  
Downtown, the Marina, the Mission and Western Addition  and 
how damage to specic districts would affect the city as a whole. 
For more about the varying impacts on different neighborhoods, see 
Appendix I, page 32.
ickr user reallocalcelebrity (John Morrison)
16   Report > January 2012
The MarinaThe Mission
In contrast, the Marina district, which is largely residential, contains The Mission district  which CAPSS denes as including the Castro, 
the smallest number of housing units of any of the districts, with Noe Valley, Bernal Heights and Glen Park, as well as the Mission 
only 7,600. However, nearly half of these units would be unusable neighborhood  is another area with a signicant number of housing 
after the expected earthquake. This is due to a predominance of units. Of the neighborhoods 48,000 units, 12,000 of them (25 
large wood-frame soft-story structures percent) would be unusable after the 
built on highly liqueable soil. The 1989 7,600 expected earthquake. A large share of these 48,000 
Loma Prieta earthquake highlighted this Housing unitsdamaged units (90 percent) are in wood-Housing units
vulnerability, collapsing seven buildings 3,800 frame soft-story buildings: Approximately 12,000 
and damaging many more in the Marina, Units rendered unusable20 percent are located in structures with Units rendered unusable
despite being centered 60 miles south of by the expected earthquakeone or two units, while 70 percent are in by the expected earthquake
the neighborhood. The Marinas population structures with three or more units. The 
is relatively afuent compared to other neighborhoods, with a high Mission districts residents are diverse, including households of all 
proportion of renters (79 percent of households). Housing damage income levels, a concentration of Latino residents, a growing number 
here would displace many young professionals who, as renters, of young professionals and a relatively high concentration of school-
would have limited nancial ties to the neighborhood. Whether these age children compared to the city as a whole. Earthquake damage 
residents stay in the Marina, or even in San Francisco, would depend could speed up neighborhood change in this historically working-
in part on whether the jobs and lifestyle they value remain a part of class neighborhood.
the post-earthquake city.
The Western Addition
The Western Addition district, comprised of diverse neighborhoods 
such as the Haight, Alamo Square, Japantown and Laurel Heights, 
contains more than 41,000 housing units. After the expected 
earthquake, more than 11,000 units (27 percent) would be 
unusable. Again, a large percentage of 
these units (90 percent) are in wood-41,000
frame soft-story buildings. The economic Housing units
diversity of this district, ranging from 11,000
wealthy enclaves near Pacic Heights to Units rendered unusable
sizable numbers of public housing units, by the expected earthquake
could highlight the dramatic differences 
in recovery between households with and without means. Some 
residents of this district will be well placed to rebuild their homes and 
ickr user carribtheir lives quickly, while others could descend into a state of extreme 
dependency on city and other organizational services. 
Costa County and SMART in Sonoma and Marin counties, will not 
connect to existing job centers and will have a limited impact on 
the overall use of transit to work. Important projects like BART to 
Silicon Valley will bypass North San Jose, which is where most of the 
proposed job growth will take place. By avoiding North San Jose on 
its route to downtown San Jose, this project misses an opportunity 
to truly promote the densication of employment and signicantly 
reduce drive-to-work rates.
                                          Report > January 201217
Safe Enough to Stay 
Section I Recommendations3. Develop a soft-story retrot program for smaller 
soft-story buildings.
San Francisco faces a clear problem. An estimated 25 percent of 
housing units might not be usable after a future expected earthquake. Estimated increase in shelter-in-place capacity: 6 to 9 percent
However, our analysis indicates that if as little as 5 percent of the 
citys housing stock is out of commission after a disaster, the city While CAPSS focused on wood-frame soft-story buildings of three 
could have a slow and arduous recovery. We recommend ve steps stories or more with ve units or more, smaller wood-frame soft-story 
San Francisco should take to improve its housing stock and plan for buildings also pose a major challenge to San Franciscos resilience. 
displaced residents.These buildings occur in large numbers in the Sunset and Richmond 
districts, both of which are highly vulnerable to the expected 
1. Adopt recovery targets for the housing sector as earthquake. We recommend developing a retrot program for these 
buildings as well. Wood-frame soft-story buildings with three and 
a whole, based on what is necessary for citywide four units would be responsible for about one-third of all unusable 
resilience in a large but expected earthquake.housing units after the expected earthquake. Wood-frame soft-story 
single-family houses and duplexes would account for another 20 
 has recommended that 95 percent shelter in place is the percent of unusable units.
appropriate goal for San Francisco. This target should be adopted by 
the City and County of San Francisco, either in the Community Safety 4. Develop retrot programs for other vulnerable 
Element of the General Plan or as a stand-alone piece of legislation housing types that impact San Franciscos 
adopted by the Board of Supervisors. The city should set a 30-year 
time frame to reach this goal, mirroring the established 30-year time resilience and also have the potential to severely 
frame to implement the CAPSS recommendations. injure or kill people.
2. Implement the Community Action Plan for Seismic Estimated increase in shelter-in-place capacity: 1 percent
Safety (CAPSS) recommended mandatory soft-There are a number of building types used for housing, such as 
story retrot program.non-ductile concrete buildings and unreinforced masonry buildings, 
that will not be able to serve as shelter-in-place housing and also 
Estimated increase in shelter-in-place capacity: 5 to 6 percent28  have the potential to suffer signicant damage, causing injury and 
loss of life. Non-ductile concrete buildings are found in a variety of 
As  noted in its 2009 Resilient City series of report, the single different neighborhoods, everywhere from relatively wealthy parts of 
most important step San Francisco can take to increase its resilience Russian Hill to the Tenderloin and Chinatown. However, we do not 
is to adopt a mandatory retrot program for wood-frame soft-story currently know how many residential non-ductile concrete buildings 
buildings with three stories or more and ve units or more. exist in the city or where they are located. The city should begin by 
developing a reliable inventory of these buildings. Some non-ductile 
The Department of Building Inspection recently completed a study concrete buildings can be very difcult and expensive to retrot, but 
as part of CAPSS that recommends a mandatory evaluation of these they nonetheless require attention because of the harm they could 
buildings, followed by mandatory retrot for those buildings that cause. Due to the complexity of some of these retrots, it might make 
are found to have a soft-story condition. If all wood-frame soft-story sense to start with evaluating these buildings and notifying owners 
residences in the city with three or more stories and ve or more and occupants of the ndings. 
residential units were seismically retrotted, we estimate that 80 
percent of city residents would be able to shelter in place after a 
magnitude 7.2 San Andreas earthquake.29 This represents a 5 to 28  These estimates were developed using available data and engineering 
6 percent improvement over where the city stands today.  assumptions. Data sources include CAPSS ATC 52-1, CAPSS ATC 52-3, the 
recommends implementing the CAPSS recommendations as soon as Department of Building Inspection Housing Database and the 2000 U.S. 
possible. Census, among others. Multiple sources were used to estimate the number of 
units by structure type and size, and these sometimes presented conicting 
information. Because conservative assumptions were used to estimate retrot 
effectiveness, it is possible that retrots may be more effective than stated above 
at improving the number of units available for shelter in place after the expected 
earthquake.
29  This assumes a high standard of retrot, referred to as Retrot Scheme 3 in 
the CAPSS report Here Today, Here Tomorrow: Earthquake Safety for Soft-Story 
Buildings (ATC 52-3). There are 4,400 wood-frame buildings with three or more 
stories and ve or more units in San Francisco, an unknown number of which 
have a soft-story condition.
18   Report > January 2012
5. Focus on developing an interim-housing strategy 
for San Francisco. 
The city should complete its interim-housing planning process and 
adhere to its objectives: rst, to keep as many residents as possible 
in their homes; second, to keep residents within their neighborhoods; 
third, to keep people within the city; and nally, if residents are 
relocated, to have a plan to bring them back. As noted previously, 
our analysis shows that several neighborhoods in San Francisco, 
including the Marina, the Richmond, the Western Addition and 
others, are likely to experience high housing losses if the expected 
earthquake occurs before housing stock is retrotted. Some of these 
districts, such as the Western Addition and the Mission, are also 
home to low-income and other vulnerable populations, which may 
pose additional challenges to recovery. It is important to develop Degenkolb Engineers
interim-housing strategies that keep residents as close as possible 
to their pre-earthquake neighborhoods and that can be tailored to Paying for Mandatory 
address neighborhood-specic conditions.Mitigation: Soft-Story 
Wood-Frame Apartment 
Buildings
In this report,  recommends a mandatory retrot program 
for soft-story wood-frame buildings of three stories of more and 
ve units or more. These are the class of buildings studied by 
the Community Action Plan for Seismic Safety. In 2010, then-
mayor Gavin Newsom convened a task force to help implement 
this recommendation. The task force drew on cost analyses 
provided by CAPSS that stated that the cost of retrotting these 
buildings would average between $13,000 and $19,000 
per unit.30  Phasing in the requirement over time will enable 
property owners to plan for this future expense. In addition, 
there has been discussion of creating a nancial incentive 
program similar to the Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) 
program for green building retrots, in which owners can opt to 
join a Mello-Roos bond district to receive nancing at favorable 
rates that can be repaid even after an owner has sold his or 
her building.  hopes the city continues to pursue this 
important incentive program. 
While the costs of completing retrots may seem expensive, 
they need to be weighed against the costs of doing nothing. 
CAPSS has estimated that if these soft-story wood-frame 
buildings are not retrotted, the city will face $4.1 billion in 
losses when the expected earthquake strikes. If the actual 
earthquake is more extreme than our scenario earthquake, the 
loss estimates will be higher.31  
30  CAPSS, Here Today, Here Tomorrow, page 28.
31  Ibid., page 15.
                                          Report > January 201219
Safe Enough to Stay 
Seismically Vulnerable Modern earthquake-resistant design is only about 50 
Structures:  years old. As a young discipline, it still grows in ts 
after each damaging event. Just as unreinforced brick 
An Engineers Rogues  buildings were recognized as widespread hazards in 
the 1930s, certain newer building types, including 
Gallerystructures of all sizes and materials, are now known to    
be vulnerable.
Unreinforced masonry building. These brick and mortar buildings 
have been killing people in California earthquakes since the Gold 
Rush. Often called URM, unreinforced masonry was prohibited 
after the 1933 Long Beach earthquake, but thousands of older 
buildings remained. The most common hazard involves unbraced 
parapets falling onto sidewalks and peeling the upper walls away 
from the roof. San Francisco adopted a parapet ordinance in 1969, 
but parapets are not the whole problem. In 1986, state legislation 
required jurisdictions in highly active seismic zones to adopt 
mitigation measures. San Franciscos 1992 URM ordinance was 
All photos courtesy Degenkolb Engineersadopted after the Loma Prieta earthquake.
Soft-story wood-frame. An abundance of wall openings in the rst 
story, typically for garage bays or storefront windows, makes these 
buildings vulnerable to collapse when the exible rst story sways 
sideways. This class includes apartment buildings with ground-oor 
parking. Many of San Franciscos soft-story buildings are further 
complicated by hillside conditions and by extensive openings along 
more than one side.
House over garage. This is the smaller, single-family version of the 
soft-story problem. Outside San Francisco, this type of structure is 
often a ranch house with a two-car garage. San Francisco has its 
own examples, particularly in the Richmond and Sunset districts. 
On a 25-foot lot, there is usually enough wall area, even with a 
garage opening and a wide main entrance, to accommodate a 
decent retrot sufcient to stiffen the structure, preventing collapse 
and  just as importantly  maintaining habitability.
20   Report > January 2012
Non-ductile concrete frame. Ductility is the property that allows 
a structure to bend without breaking. In concrete, its achieved 
by careful design of the embedded steel reinforcing bars  a 
lesson learned from the collapse of several relatively new concrete 
buildings in the 1971 San Fernando earthquake. Most pre-1980 
concrete structures are therefore suspect, but its unclear how many 
should be considered potential killers. Unlike URM or soft-story 
buildings, NDC structures are hard to spot from the sidewalk, and 
their evaluation and retrot can require relatively sophisticated 
engineering.
Tilt-up. Relatively cheap and fast to build, tilt-ups remain the 
structural system of choice for one-story warehouses, strip malls 
and light-industrial facilities. The chief weak spot in pre-1995 tilt-
ups is the connection between the rigid walls and the exible roof. 
When that connection fails, the concrete wall panel falls away from 
the building and the roof collapses. Similar buildings with reinforced 
concrete block walls often have the same vulnerability.
Cripple wall. The cripple wall is the short wood stud wall around a 
houses crawl space. With no stiff plaster nishes or room partitions 
in the crawl space, perimeter cripple walls are inadequate to support 
the swaying house above. As in a soft-story building, the cripple 
walls lean, then fall over. Though rarely life-threatening, a cripple-
wall collapse displaces a family and destroys its chief economic 
asset. Cripple walls are easily and effectively retrotted by adding 
plywood sheathing inside the crawl space.
Nonstructural components. Any part of a building thats heavy, 
brittle or loosely attached, even if it carries no structural loads, is 
vulnerable to earthquake damage. The heavy parts  chimneys, 
brick veneer, concrete cladding panels  can be life-threatening. 
Gas lines and gas-red equipment can start res. The rest  
light xtures, plumbing and sprinkler lines, HVAC equipment, 
shelving and so on  can take a building out of service, disrupting 
operations and delaying recovery.
                                          Report > January 201221
Safe Enough to Stay 
Section II: The need for shelter-in-place 
What engineering criteria criteria
should be used to determine When and why would a shelter-in-place evaluation be done? The 
whether a home has adequate short answer is: in the same cases and for the same reasons that 
safety-based evaluations are done now. An overarching theme 
shelter-in-place capacity?of s Resilient City initiative is that planning and regulatory 
priorities should shift from personal safety to community resilience. 
Thus, wherever current programs, regulations or ordinances call 
Seismic evaluation is not like a smog check. There is no law requiring for seismic evaluation or upgrade, that work should (or could) be 
an existing building to be evaluated every few years. Even when the based on shelter-in-place capacity instead of on safety alone. If new 
building code for new construction changes, new regulations are programs are put in place to improve citywide resilience, they would 
not retroactive. Consequently, most San Francisco buildings, while use shelter-in-place engineering criteria as well.
legally occupied and quite safe in day-to-day conditions, do not meet 
the current seismic codes for new buildings  and are not required Seismic work (i.e., evaluations and upgrades) can be classied as 
or expected to do so. Only when a building undergoes a triggering voluntary, mandatory or triggered. Each type of project or program 
event such as an addition, alteration, repair or change of occupancy could use shelter-in-place engineering criteria, as opposed to 
is it likely that it will be evaluated for earthquake performance and, provisions that look solely at safety.
if highly decient, subject to retrot. There are some exceptions. San 
Franciscos unreinforced masonry buildings have been subject to The good news is that much voluntary work already prioritizes 
mandatory evaluation and retrot since 1992. And many owners and reoccupancy and recovery. UC Berkeley, for example, recognized 
tenants voluntarily evaluate their buildings, but this voluntary work is that even if its buildings have been deemed safe, not being able to 
typically not required to meet any upgrade standard. use them during repairs could jeopardize the universitys mission, so 
it adopted an earthquake recovery goal to limit closure to no more 
Whether mandated by ordinance or triggered by the building code, than 30 days.32 In the housing sector, however, voluntary work for 
seismic evaluations in San Francisco use criteria based on structural shelter-in-place or recovery purposes is rare. Where it does occur, 
safety alone. With few exceptions, the criteria consider only whether it is done without a commonly adopted standard and without the 
the building would threaten lives by collapsing or would suffer benet of plans that have been checked and approved by the building 
severe damage during an earthquake. The criteria do not require department, because voluntary work falls outside the scope of most 
an explicit consideration of whether a damaged building would be building regulations. Further, even if the citys plan-checkers and 
safe to reoccupy or how long it might have to remain vacant while inspectors were to certify voluntary work, they currently have no 
undergoing repairs. criteria by which to judge a shelter-in-place evaluation or retrot.
 recognizes that San Franciscos resilience requires more than While a shelter-in-place evaluation is in some ways a prediction of a 
basic safety during the earthquake. It requires that buildings remain buildings performance during and after an earthquake, it is important 
habitable and repairable so that occupants can shelter safely in them to recognize that actual post-earthquake reoccupancy will depend on 
even before repairs begin. the nature of ownership and on individual owners or tenants choices 
about whether to stay or leave. In owner-occupied housing, the 
To support the move to resilience-based earthquake planning, the city owner is more likely to tolerate (or waive liability for) certain damage, 
should revisit its existing structural-evaluation criteria. Specically, so reoccupancy is likely to happen sooner. But an owner of rental 
the city needs to determine what shelter-in-place means from an housing might not allow tenants to reoccupy the building if remaining 
engineering perspective and to develop criteria for analyzing now, damage would increase the owners liability or if reoccupancy would 
before the earthquake, whether a building is likely to serve as shelter-delay building repairs or increase their cost. Rent control will also play 
in-place housing afterward. The purpose of this section is to discuss a signicant role in the choices made by both renters and owners. 
what shelter-in-place capacity means in engineering terms and to 
outline the engineering criteria that building owners and policymakers The evaluation criteria recommended here do not account for these 
might adopt for pre-earthquake shelter-in-place evaluations.variables. The best strategy for promoting reoccupancy might not 
have much to do with engineering standards; we encourage the city 
to work with owners to incentivize quick reoccupancy through Good 
32  Comerio, Mary C., Performance Engineering and Disaster Recovery, in Samaritan laws or otherwise waive liability or relocation penalties.
Bracing Berkeley: A Guide to Seismic Safety on the UC Berkeley Campus 
(Pacic Earthquake Engineering Research Center, January 2006).
22   Report > January 2012
Voluntary, Mandatory and 
Triggered Seismic Work 
Voluntary shelter-in-place improvements would benet from 
dened standards, just as voluntary safety improvements have. For 
example, many California jurisdictions have endorsed standards for 
the voluntary retrot of houses with unbraced cripple walls. (See 
Seismically Vulnerable Structures: An Engineers Rogues Gallery 
on page 20.) While the work remains voluntary, the availability 
of standards helps to stabilize the market for builders, provide a 
measure of consumer protection for owners and set precedents for 
incentive programs run by insurers or jurisdictions. In the same way, 
even where shelter-in-place retrots are only voluntary, standards will 
benet all stakeholders and will help signal the citys new priorities 
to the community.
Mandatory programs traditionally address only the most persistent 
and most critical risks. Californias hospital-retrot program, for 
example, recognizes the need for safe and functional buildings,33 but 
of course it is limited to only a relatively few essential facilities. San 
Franciscos unreinforced masonry program also mandates retrot, 
but it applies only bare-bones safety criteria, with little expectation 
of post-earthquake habitability. Plus, it exempts small residential 
buildings. Most residential structures, whether masonry, wood, steel 
or concrete, have never been subject to mandatory retrots. 
For community resilience, however, post-earthquake housing 
becomes critical, and  has urged the city to adopt a mandatory 
retrot policy for certain highly vulnerable multi-unit buildings.34 
If such a mandate is implemented, engineering criteria will need 
to come with it, and if the purpose of the mandate is to improve 
citywide resilience, those criteria will likely need to be based on 
shelter-in-place goals.
Triggered work provides the type of policy lever that could be used 
to ensure that retrots occur. San Franciscos building code triggers 
seismic evaluation when a major project  an addition, alteration, 
repair or change of occupancy  would signicantly extend the 
buildings life. (Condominium conversions do not trigger seismic 
evaluation. Homeless shelters are also exempt.) Triggered seismic 
work does not occur on a specied timeline, and code triggers 
by themselves are probably not an effective way to do mitigation 
citywide. Still, when they do result in seismic work, that work is 
currently done with safety-based criteria. If the city were to embrace 
resilience as a goal, it could modify its code provisions to ensure that 
when seismic work is triggered, the repairs meet shelter-in-place 
standards.
33  Seismic Compliance Senate Bills 1953, 1661, and 499, Ofce of 
Statewide Health Planning and Development, www.oshpd.ca.gov/FDD/seismic_
compliance/index.html
34  , The Resilient City, Part I: Before the Disaster, The Urbanist, 
February 2009, 4.photos by ickr user johnclarkemills
                                          Report > January 201223
Safe Enough to Stay 
Assessing the expected This approach  i.e., modifying a national standard to make it 
applicable to certain performance objectives  has precedent. 
performance of individual Californias Ofce of Statewide Health Planning and Development 
(OSHPD) and Division of the State Architect (DSA) have used this 
buildings before the strategy for the mandatory evaluation and retrot of hospitals and for 
voluntary evaluation of K-12 schools, respectively. To implement this 
earthquake approach, s performance objectives  both the magnitude 7.2 
scenario earthquake and the shelter-in-place standard  must be 
translated into terms used within ASCE 31, particularly hazard level 
While shelter-in-place capacity is needed after the earthquake, the 
and performance level:
ability to assess an individual buildings expected performance must 
be done beforehand. What engineering criteria should be used, prior 
to the event, to determine whether a house, apartment building, Hazard level
condominium or other housing facility has shelter-in-place capacity We have based our shelter-in-place objective on the scenario of a 
adequate for a magnitude 7.2 San Andreas earthquake?magnitude 7.2 earthquake on the peninsula segment of the San 
Andreas Fault. While a scenario event is useful for planning and 
We recommend that feasible shelter-in-place evaluation criteria for policy development, and while a scenario can capture realistic 
should be based on existing standards already familiar to practicing aggregate effects over a large area, scenarios are not traditionally 
engineers and code ofcials. Those standards should take into used for the evaluation or retrot of individual buildings. Instead, a 
account:given building is analyzed for site-specic hazards that account for 
t $PTUFGGFDUJWFQSPDFEVSFT	BTPQQPTFEUPSFMZJOHPODPNQMJDBUFEthe relative possibilities of different events on different fault systems. 
analysis)For example, ASCE 31 considers impacts of earthquakes on both the 
t 5IFSBOHFPGSFTJEFOUJBMTUSVDUVSFUZQFTJO4BO'SBODJTDPHayward and San Andreas faults.
t %JGGFSFODFTCFUXFFOOFXBOEFYJTUJOHTUSVDUVSFT	VOMJLFNPTU
building code provisions)Therefore, to encourage the engineering community to adopt s 
t /POTUSVDUVSBMDPOEJUJPOTUIBUBGGFDUTIFMUFSJOQMBDFIBCJUBCJMJUZrecommendations, we recommend using the same site-specic 
earthquake hazard parameters specied by ASCE 31, which match 
This report recommends the use of the national standard called those of the building code for new construction. The ASCE 31 
Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings,35 also known as ASCE 31.earthquake hazard level should be reduced to account for differences 
in the size of the earthquake we are planning for and the fact that we 
To determine whether a building has shelter-in-place capacity, the are converting a single scenario earthquake (for the whole city) to a 
ASCE 31 criteria should be modied to consider only the types of site-specic hazard (for individual buildings). 
damage that could be critical obstacles for sheltering in place. The 
criteria should reference approved maps of relevant hazards and For a more technical discussion of how to adjust ASCE 31, see 
expected infrastructure performance.Appendix II, page 36.
Performance level
What Is ACSE 31?The  objective identies a new performance level not found 
In this report, we refer to ASCE 31, a national standard for the in current engineering codes or standards, that of shelter in place. 
seismic evaluation of existing buildings that was developed by ASCE 31 denes two performance levels, Life Safety and Immediate 
the American Society of Civil Engineers. ASCE 31s main feature Occupancy. As the terms suggest, a building that meets the standards 
is a set of checklists that guide the engineer to look for critical for Life Safety performance avoids collapse, major falling hazards, 
deciencies in a buildings structure, architecture and systems, hazardous materials release and other life-threatening damage, but 
based on observed damage patterns from past earthquakes. With it can suffer potentially high levels of repairable damage, especially 
these checklists, supplemented by engineering calculations, a to nonstructural components. A building that meets Immediate 
building can be evaluated with respect to how we can expect it to Occupancy performance standards avoids damage or the loss of 
perform in a future expected earthquake: whether it will likely be services that would substantially delay recovery. Since shelter in place 
safe and occupiable (Immediate Occupancy); safe and repairable will be dened in terms of both safety and restoration of services, the 
(Life Safety); or not safe due to possible collapse, falling hazards, re shelter-in-place performance level will combine aspects of ASCE 31s 
or hazardous materials release. Because ASCE 31 does not directly Life Safety and Immediate Occupancy criteria. For a further denition 
address the question of shelter in place as we dene it here, we are of the performance levels in ASCE 31, see Appendix II.
proposing ways to adapt it to this new thinking about earthquake 
resilience.35  Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings [ASCE/SEI 31-03], (American 
Society of Civil Engineers, 2003).
24   Report > January 2012
Quick, cost-effective evaluation
Pre-earthquake evaluation criteria will help owners and tenants Section II Recommendations
assess their individual buildings and, if applied through city inventory 
programs, will help the city gauge the overall shelter-in-place capacity In order to determine what percentage of San Franciscos housing 
of its housing stock. To be effective, however, the criteria must be stock will meet shelter-in-place standards, the city needs to develop 
usable without costly or sophisticated analysis. We recommend evaluation criteria for voluntary, mandatory and triggered seismic 
the checklist-based criteria that ASCE 31 calls its Tier 1 procedure, work on residential buildings. 
although the ASCE 31 checklists will need to be modied to suit 
the shelter-in-place objective. Further, in order to avoid the costs 6. Further develop shelter-in-place evaluation criteria 
and other disincentives associated with some site investigations, the for voluntary, mandatory and triggered seismic 
city should replace certain generic ASCE 31 provisions with its own work on residential buildings.
versions or with simple maps. 
We have described one approach to developing shelter-in-place 
The necessary modications are discussed in Appendix II. In brief, evaluation criteria. However, much work is yet to be done.  
they include developing:recommends that the City Administrators Ofce, the Department 
t 'BDUPSTSFMBUJOHUIFCVJMEJOHDPEFTEFTJHOFBSUIRVBLFUPUIFof Building Inspection and Department of Emergency Management 
shelter-in-place scenario earthquake, i.e., the expected earthquake.jointly take the following steps to further develop shelter-in-place 
t "NBQPGTPJMTJUFDMBTTFT
UPBWPJEUIFOFFEGPSTJUFTQFDJmDevaluation criteria:
investigation.t $POWFOFBOJOUFSOBMTUBLFIPMEFSXPSLJOHHSPVQ
XJUIUFDIOJDBM
t "NBQPGMJRVFGBDUJPOBOETMPQFTUBCJMJUZIB[BSET
BHBJOUPBWPJEconsultants as needed, to set broad guidelines for applying ASCE 
the need for site-specic investigation. Where the likelihood of 31 to building evaluations based on shelter-in-place criteria. 
liquefaction or slope instability is high, further investigation of the t "TTJHOTUBGG
XJUIUFDIOJDBMDPOTVMUBOUTBTOFFEFE
UPEFWFMPQ
structure is probably moot, as the ground deformation will render specic modications to ASCE 31 that implement the broad 
the building uninhabitable.guidelines by editing the engineering procedures and criteria and 
t 5IFTVCTFUPGQPUFOUJBMTUSVDUVSBMEFmDJFODJFTBTTPDJBUFEXJUIby adopting certain default values and data appropriate to San 
buildings declared unsafe under a formal building evaluation Francisco. (See Appendix II for a detailed list of issues that will 
known as ATC-20. (See page 29.) need to be resolved.)
t 5IFTVCTFUPGQPUFOUJBMOPOTUSVDUVSBMEFmDJFODJFTUIBUXPVMEBGGFDUt )BWFUIF4BO'SBODJTDP-JGFMJOFT$PVODJMVSHFVUJMJUZQSPWJEFSTUP
shelter-in-place capacity. Examples include chimney collapse, estimate outages by neighborhood for planning purposes.
broken windows or damage to heating systems or piping. These 
would be linked to expected repair times and coordinated with the 7.  As draft criteria are developed, generate a new 
post-earthquake habitability requirements described in Section III loss estimate for the magnitude 7.2 San Andreas 
of this report.and other scenario earthquakes.
As discussed in Section I, our best estimate of housing loss and 
its impact on recovery is based on the CAPSS data. But that loss 
model does not account specically for what we have now dened 
as shelter-in-place performance. With the new denition in place, 
and with draft engineering criteria in progress, the Department of 
Building Inspection and the Department of Emergency Management 
should undertake a new loss estimate focused on shelter-in-place 
performance. These new loss estimates will be needed for the 
benet-cost models and Environmental Impact Report studies that 
will precede and support mitigation programs and legislation. 
 
                                          Report > January 201225
Safe Enough to Stay 
Section III: Figure 5 illustrates the idea of alternative habitability standards 
that would apply in emergencies and gradually revert to normal 
What needs to be done to code requirements. The blue line represents the code standards for 
habitability that normally apply. When an earthquake occurs, some 
enable residents to shelter in damage might result, but if the damage is light, it will not affect the 
citys overall resilience, so no relaxation of the normal standards 
place for days and months would be justied. A declared housing emergency, however, indicates 
that damage  and possibly housing loss  is signicant enough 
after a large earthquake?to justify special measures to speed response and recovery. The 
stepped red line represents the minimum standards to be met 
within a residence. The pink shaded area represents resources that 
After an earthquake, we want San Franciscans to shelter in place in 
a neighborhood service center provides outside the home. The red 
their homes. Yet, while a building may be structurally safe enough 
shaded area represents the actual loss of habitable housing. As 
to occupy following a seismic event, it may be considered unsafe or 
repairs are made, buildings (and housing standards) return to normal. 
substandard under the applicable codes,36 because it wont meet 
the existing minimum standards for health and safety for residential 
One of the challenges in developing and implementing shelter in-
housing in non-emergency times. How do we set a post-earthquake 
place standards is that these alternative standards do not correspond 
standard that is safe enough yet not so stringent that people are told 
with any currently adopted standards in San Franciscos Building 
unnecessarily to vacate their homes to nd temporary shelter? 
Code, Housing Code or other codes. Once San Francisco has adopted 
 believes it is critical to dene alternative shelter-in-place 
shelter in place as a performance goal for new and/or existing 
housing standards that allow people to stay in their homes safely but 
buildings, local building codes will need to be amended. 
dont deem otherwise safe buildings unsuitable for occupancy. These 
alternative standards would supersede regular code requirements 
during a housing-emergency period declared by the city after a major Minimum habitability requirements for occupancy 
earthquake. Such an emergency period might extend for days, weeks after the earthquake
or longer. When should a building be considered acceptable for shelter in place? 
Conditions that are adequate right after the earthquake may not be 
Shelter-in-place alternative standards could signicantly reduce acceptable one to three months down the road.  has identied 
emergency-shelter and interim-housing needs while maintaining the ve different post-earthquake time periods and dened the major 
local population base necessary to support recovery. The alternative habitability requirements for each:
standards should become more stringent as San Francisco recovers 
after the earthquake and should remain in force until the citys 1.  The immediate post-earthquake period
housing stock is completely restored.2.  One week after the earthquake
3.  One month after the earthquake
Shelter-in-place standards should be phased, with the expectation 4.  Three months after the earthquake
that repairs need to be made over time to restore habitability. For 5.  After the declared housing emergency is over
example, certain standards that will be considered acceptable 
immediately following the earthquake (such as using portable outdoor Increasingly robust habitability standards will need to be met in each 
toilets) will not be acceptable three months after the earthquake. The phase, as described in Figure 6 (page 28). 
shelter-in-place standards should dene which needs will be met 
by the building itself and which will be met outside the building for 
each time phase. Those resources that must be accessible outside 
the building will have to be provided in a neighborhood service center 
located in close proximity to shelter-in-place housing. 
Even if all of the alternative standards are met, however, people may 
choose not to shelter in place. There is no obligation under these 
alternative regulations for any person to remain in any residence; any 
person might choose to relocate to emergency or temporary shelter, 
move to an undamaged facility or make other arrangements. 
36  The minimum standards for health and safety for residential occupancy at 
non-emergency times are detailed in the California Health and Safety Code and 
in the San Francisco Housing Code.
26   Report > January 2012
Figure 5: Phased Habitability Standards Following an Earthquake
After an earthquake, even housing that is safe enough to occupy will not meet existing codes. A phased 
standard needs to be dened in this post-earthquake period, where requirements are gradually increased 
until the housing emergency is over. 
Code Standard for Habitability
Overall 
reduced 
habitability
Habitability
elements 
provided by
neighborhood
centers
Habitability 
elements to
be met within
residence
Habitability
DaysWeeksMonths
EarthquakeEmergency End of housing
occursdeclaredemergency
Source:  analysis
                                          Report > January 201227
Safe Enough to Stay 
Figure 6: An Alternative Habitability Standard
In the post-earthquake period, an alternative habitability standard will need to be dened. 
This standard will need to take into account the safety of the housing unit, the need for 
weather protection and the availability of utilities.
 Immediate post-earthquake period
The building must be safe.Safety will be dened by an engineering tool (ATC-20) that has been modied 
by the city. Residents will not be permitted to occupy buildings or portions of 
buildings posted as unsafe. Prior to a formal inspection by an authorized person, 
owners and tenants may self-inspect using a simplied checklist to be provided 
by the city.
There must be at least one usable exit path from every occupied area.Inclined counterbalanced re escapes that are fully operational may be used to 
provide the one clear exit path. Its also acceptable to use a path thats currently 
blocked by building contents or other nonstructural elements but that can readily 
be cleared.
One week after the earthquake.  Meet all the conditions above, plus the following:
Portable re extinguishersMust be in place if required for multifamily residences.
Weather protection: roofMay be a temporary plastic covering.
Weather protection: wallsMay be a temporary plastic covering.
Weather protection: windowsMay be a temporary plastic covering.
Provision of a building addressMay be a temporary address placard.
Smoke detectorsBattery-powered okay.
CO2 detectorsBattery-powered okay.
Elevators in buildings of ve or more storiesMust work seven days following restoration of electrical service.
One month after the earthquake.  Meet all the conditions above, plus the following:
ElectricityMust work 30 days following restoration of service.
GasMust work 30 days following restoration of service.
Sewer and toiletMust work in home 30 days following restoration of service. Where sewers are 
not working or pipes are leaking, waste must be bagged, treated with chemicals 
and disposed of according to local instructions. For more information, see 
sewersmart.org/disrupted.html 
WaterMust work 30 days following restoration of service.
Fire alarm systems and other required alarmsMust work 30 days following restoration of electrical service.
Emergency exit illuminationMust work 30 days following restoration of electrical service.
Electrical light: at least one xed or cord-and-plug type per roomMust work 30 days following restoration of electrical service.
Hot water supplyMust work 30 days following restoration of service of water and gas/electric.
Refrigeration for foodMust work 30 days following restoration of electrical service.
Three months after the earthquake.  Meet all the conditions above, plus the following:
Automatic re sprinklers, sprinkler wet standpipes and re pumpsMust work 90 days following restoration of water service.
Entrance doors and hardware/locksMust work 90 days after the earthquake.
Second exit, if requiredFire escapes are acceptable as second exits.
Heating serviceMust work 90 days following restoration of utility service.
After the housing emergency is over.  All normal habitability requirements will apply at the end of the declared housing-emergency period.
Source:  analysis
28   Report > January 2012
Building evaluation and inspection
After a major earthquake, engineers and design professionals come 
from all over the country to help conduct formal building inspections 
using what is known as the ATC-20 evaluation procedure. They 
evaluate building structures and tag them depending on their level 
of damage: Red tags mean a building is unsafe and should not be 
entered or occupied; yellow tags indicate restricted use, meaning a 
building either requires further evaluation or is okay to occupy except 
for designated areas; and green tags mean that no unsafe conditions 
were found or suspected. 
Shelter-in-place evaluations are not a building tagging program; 
instead, they will provide immediate guidance for residents as to Kousaku Maeda, courtesy Kobe University Library
whether nonstructural and related conditions make a building suitable 
or unsuitable for continued occupancy. Residents will need to review 
shelter-in-place conditions within 24 hours of an earthquake so that 
they know whether they can remain in their homes. Meanwhile, 
it may take several days or weeks for inspectors and design 
professionals to undertake ATC-20 evaluations. 
Shelter-in-place standards need to be clear enough so that most 
residents will be able to assess their own buildings. But many 
residents will need help applying shelter-in-place standards to their 
buildings while they wait for design professionals to complete an ATC-
20 evaluation. Community volunteers can be trained to help residents 
determine if their home meets shelter-in-place standards.
ickr user kosmosxipo
In many areas of the city, certain buildings will have minimal damage 
while neighboring buildings will be structurally unsafe. In buildings 
that appear to have substantial structural damage, residents will need 
to wait for a formal ATC-20 structural inspection by a designated city 
inspector before sheltering in place.
Enforcement of shelter-in-place standards and requirements for repair 
Enforcing shelter-in-place standards is key. The city should use its 
enforcement power to ensure that property owners make repairs in 
compliance with the phased habitability standards described above. 
The responsibility rests with the property owner to provide for repairs 
and the restoration of habitable conditions. 
Lori Peek
Properties that are abandoned or otherwise fail to meet legal 
requirements for property repair, retrot or maintenance should 
be subject to the enforcement and abatement provisions of the 
applicable San Francisco codes.
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division
Source:  analysis
                                          Report > January 201229
Safe Enough to Stay 
Section III Recommendationsdetermine whether or not they can shelter in place. These should 
include a set of graphic illustrations and a shelter-in-place checklist, 
which should be incorporated in outreach and training materials to 
A post-earthquake alternative habitability standard should be building owners and residents to inform them of shelter-in-place 
established and implemented in order to encourage residents to habitability requirements, standards, inspection procedures and repair 
shelter in place. The following recommendations will help to achieve expectations. The training materials could also include such elements 
this goal. as door tags that say, Im Okay! or I Need Help. Additionally, 
residents could receive special training in shelter in place prior to an 
8. Create an interdepartmental shelter-in-place task event, much like the current Neighborhood Emergency Response 
force.Team (NERT) program. 
The Mayors Ofce should create an interdepartmental shelter-B. Coordinating with existing post-disaster evaluation procedures
in-place task force. This task force will ensure coordination with After an earthquake, professionals will come from all over the country 
the Department of Building Inspection, the San Francisco Fire to help evaluate buildings using the ATC-20 evaluation procedure. 
Department (which has joint jurisdiction on multifamily housing and If San Franciscos evaluation procedures are modied to focus on 
must agree and cooperate with regard to shelter-in-place standards), shelter in place, ATC-20 inspectors will need to be trained in San 
the Department of Public Health and the Department of Emergency Franciscobased shelter-in-place habitability standards. This training 
Management. Other agencies that should be involved include the can be done when ATC-20 inspectors check in with the Department 
Department of Public Works, the Mayors Ofce on Disability and the of Building Inspection before being released into the eld to conduct 
Mayors Ofce of Housing, among others.inspections. 
9. Prepare and adopt regulations that allow for the C. Storing materials necessary to allow shelter-in-place standards 
use of shelter-in-place habitability standards in a to be met
declared housing-emergency period.The city will need to have certain materials, such as plastic sheeting 
for weather protection, on hand for use after a major earthquake. 
Shelter-in-place standards may be adopted in advance of an  recommends that the Department of Building Inspection, 
emergency or be completed and ready to adopt as part of the citys the Department of Emergency Management and the Department of 
emergency measures. Various agencies should adopt administrative Public Health coordinate to develop a list of these materials and the 
bulletins and similar regulations that detail how code requirements quantities that will be needed. 
and policies will need to be implemented. These should include 
complaint, inspection and enforcement procedures. 11. Develop plans for neighborhood support centers 
to provide necessary help for shelter-in-place 
During a declared emergency, a separate housing emergency communities. 
may also be declared, which would allow the enforcement of the 
alternative shelter-in-place habitability standards. A declared housing Neighborhood support centers are not emergency shelters. Rather, 
emergency may continue as a special emergency period past the they are resource centers that encourage people to stay in their 
general declared emergency period and may be applied to specic homes by providing essential services and information. A store, 
areas where housing is most severely impacted. restaurant, small business, religious or social facility could provide the 
necessary space, but a large garage or other covered area could also 
10. Develop a plan to implement a shelter-in-place sufce. These neighborhood support centers will need to be staffed 
program.and equipped to offer the following services, or quick contact with 
such services37:
This implementation plan should include creating public training t *OGPSNBUJPO
OFXTBOEHFOFSBMOFJHICPSIPPEDPNNVOJDBUJPOBOE
materials, coordinating with existing post-disaster building-evaluation contact
procedures and stockpiling the materials needed to achieve shelter in t 5FMFQIPOF
EJHJUBM
QPTUBMBOEPUIFSDPNNVOJDBUJPOTFSWJDFT
place in the post-disaster period.t 7PMVOUFFSBTTJTUBODFJODPOEVDUJOHTIFMUFSJOQMBDFFWBMVBUJPOT
(on-site or immediately available when required)
A. Preparing public training materialst 3FGFSSBMTUPDPNNVOJUZTFSWJDFPSHBOJ[BUJPOTBOEBHFODJFT
The interagency task force recommended above should develop t %JTUSJCVUJPOPGTVQQMJFT
XBUFSBOEGPPE
simple and clear training materials for residents to help them t 3FGSJHFSBUJPOGPSDSJUJDBMTVQQMJFT	NFEJDBUJPO
FUD

t $POOFDUJPOUPTFSWJDFTTVDIBTMBVOESZGBDJMJUJFT
37  For a full list of services needed in neighborhood support centers, see t &MFDUSJDBMTVQQMZ
JODMVEJOHFMFDUSPOJDTDIBSHJOHGBDJMJUJFT
Appendix III, page 42.t &NFSHFODZ
CBTJDBOENBKPSNFEJDBMDBSF
30   Report > January 2012
Section IV: 4. Make use of the shelter-in-place evaluation criteria 
proposed in Section II of this report.
Applicability to other 
jurisdictions has called for the further development of these criteria, which 
can be applied in other jurisdictions seeking to evaluate their housing 
stock for shelter-in-place performance. In particular, the proposed 
San Francisco is not the only jurisdiction in the  that is criteria apply jurisdiction-specic maps and default values. Other 
at risk of a seismic event. The United States Geological Survey jurisdictions can begin developing similar data now, even as San 
estimates that there is a 63 percent chance of a major earthquake Francisco works on completing the generic criteria. In addition, San 
occurring in the  some time in the next 30 years. The Francisco has worked with FEMA to produce a new engineering 
Hayward Fault is the most likely to rupture, causing massive damage methodology specically for the cost-effective evaluation and retrot 
in the East Bay. of wood-frame soft-story apartment buildings. 
Much of the work developed for this report and prior  reports 5. Build on the work being done by San 
is applicable to other seismically vulnerable jurisdictions. Other Franciscos Lifelines Council to analyze utility 
jurisdictions could implement the following set of recommendations to interdependency.
increase seismic resilience. 
San Francisco has convened a council of all utility providers with 
1. Dene resilience and develop a specic target for infrastructure serving San Francisco. As part of its work, the Lifelines 
housing performance. Council is conducting a study of the interdependency between 
utilities such as electricity, water, sewer, communications and 
In our 2009 report Dening What San Francisco Needs from Its transportation to uncover potential weaknesses in these systems 
Seismic Mitigation Policies,  developed performance targets that could cause cascading impacts after an earthquake if they are 
for buildings and lifelines, including a goal of 95 percent shelter in not adequately planned for. Once complete, this study will include 
place for housing. This approach of setting a dened and ambitious ndings that will be of use to other parts of the region, since many 
goal for community recovery has resonated with policymakers utilities are regional in scope. 
and the technical community. Other jurisdictions could take these 
performance targets and adapt them to meet their own needs. 6. Make use of the post-earthquake alternative 
shelter-in-place habitability standards proposed in 
2. Complete inventories of vulnerable housing stock. this report.
Creating inventories will be a critical rst step. s analysis and Each jurisdiction will need to develop alternative shelter-in-place 
recommendations for San Francisco build on reliable data and loss habitability standards in order to encourage sheltering in place. 
estimates produced by  committees, the local engineering The timeline in Figure 6 (page 28) can serve as the basis for these 
community and the CAPSS project. Other jurisdictions might need standards. Materials developed in San Francisco (for example, the 
to undertake similar building counts and mapping exercises to relate shelter-in-place graphic illustrations and checklist) can help other 
structure types and geologic hazards to residential occupancies and jurisdictions create comparable materials. 
demographics.
 
3. Develop procedures to retrot vulnerable housing 
types.
Building on the work done in CAPSS, San Francisco is developing a 
detailed program to both evaluate and retrot soft-story wood-frame 
multifamily housing with ve or more units and three or more stories. 
Other jurisdictions may have comparable types of vulnerable housing. 
As San Francisco develops evaluation and retrot standards, other 
jurisdictions can adapt these to meet their needs. 
                                          Report > January 201231
Safe Enough to Stay 
Appendix IWorking with data from the Community Action Plan for Seismic 
Safety (CAPSS),  has estimated the impacts of a Magnitude 
Impacts of the expected 7.2 San Andreas earthquake on San Franciscos neighborhoods. We 
attempted to determine how much of San Franciscos housing would 
earthquake on San Franciscos be usable after the expected earthquake, meaning it would meet 
shelter-in-place standards and be safe enough to be inhabited while 
neighborhoodsbeing repaired.
Figure 7: Housing Units in Various Damage States by Neighborhood
The safety performance of housing stock in different neighborhoods will vary after the expected 
earthquake. Some housing units will meet shelter-in-place standards, while others will not be usable 
immediately after an earthquake. A few wont even be repairable in the long term. 
Number of Housing UnitsUsable light damage units
Usable moderate damage units
60,000
Not usable repairable damage units
Not usable, not repairable damage units
Total units 
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
0
Sunset
BayviewMarina
ExcelsiorMerced
InglesideMission
DowntownRichmondTwin Peaks
North Beach
Pacic Heights
Central WaterfrontWestern Addition
Sources: SFGIS, Census 2000 and  analysis of CAPSS Hazus Output Data
32   Report > January 2012
Appendix I
Figure 8: Unusable Housing by Neighborhood and Structure Type
We expect the majority of housing that is declared unusable after the expected earthquake to be 
wood-frame soft-story residences. Non-ductile concrete buildings will make up a higher percentage in 
neighborhoods such as Downtown, where there are a greater number of these buildings.
Number of Unusable Housing Units1 & 2 family wood-frame soft-story residences
3+ family wood-frame soft-story residences
16,000Concrete buildings built before 1980
All other types of buildings
14,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
BayviewMarinaSunset
ExcelsiorMerced
InglesideMission
DowntownRichmondTwin Peaks
North Beach
Pacic Heights
Central WaterfrontWestern Addition
Sources: SFGIS, Census 2000 and  analysis of CAPSS Hazus Output Data
                                          Report > January 201233
Appendix I
Figure 9: Demographic Data by Neighborhood
San Franciscos neighborhoods do not just differ by the types of buildings that are found there. They also 
are home to different groups of people. Any plan to provide emergency or interim housing should take these 
important demographic differences into account.  
PopulationWhiteBlackAmerican Indian/EskimoAsianPacic IslanderOtherMulti RaceMalesFemalesUnder 5Ages 5-17Ages 18-21
Bayview3,33403,20016,0001408,1001,2003,3001,40016,00017,0002,4007,7002,000
Central Waterfront17,22011,0002,7001201,8001707007309,9007,5006601,200540
Downtown77,22036,0005,90065027,0002703,6003,80044,00032,0001,9004,6003,200
Excelsior89,81022,0006,10034044,00097012,0004,40044,00046,0005,30015,0004,800
Ingleside25,8205,6006,00010011,0001201,9001,10013,00013,0001,4004,1001,300
Marina12,65111,00058221,200111002605,7006,60036034093
Merced17,0968,800780376,100394309107,9009,2006501,7002,100
Mission122,19074,0004,6001,00014,00039021,0007,20066,00057,0005,70013,0004,700
North Beach48,56124,0006307722,000645901,20024,00025,0001,3003,2001,200
Pacific Heights32,89628,000430503,3004633074015,00017,0001,1001,700460
Richmond67,72333,0001,10015030,000731,0002,40032,00036,0002,6007,3002,300
Sunset100,68046,0001,30022048,0001601,4003,60049,00052,0004,10012,0003,800
Twin Peaks41,31126,0002,2001209,800911,3001,80021,00020,0001,7004,3001,000
Western Addition85,72054,00013,00039012,0002302,3003,80045,00041,0002,4005,4003,800
Sources: Census 2000
34   Report > January 2012
Safe Enough to Stay 
Disability 
Ages 22-29Ages 30-39Ages 40-49Ages 50-64Ages 65-UpMedian AgeMedian Age: MaleMedian Age: FemaleHouseholdsAvg. Household SizeFamiliesAvg. Family SizeHousing UnitsOwner OccupiedRenter OccupiedMedian Income    Status
3,8005,100470042003,5003332359,3003.57,1003.99,6004,8004,500$43,00031,000
3,2005,2003,2002,3001,1003737368,1001.92,9002.58,9003,1005,100$77,00015,000
14,00015,00012,00013,00013,00041414044,0001.711,0002.748,0003,10040,000$31,00074,000
11,00014,00013,00014,00013,00036343824,0003.719,0004.125,00016,0007,800$55,00084,000
3,3004,1004,0004,3003,6003736397,5003.45,5003.87,7005,5002,000$64,00025,000
2,5004,3001,4001,5001,7003535358,0001.52,0002.48,3001,7006,300$79,00012,000
2,9002,6002,1002,3002,8003938406,9002.43,7003.07,1002,0004,900$64,00017,000
22,00030,00020,00016,00011,00035353550,0002.520,0003.251,00016,00033,000$62,000120,000
8,60010,0006,8008,3009,60040404126,0001.99,4002.828,0005,00021,000$57,00048,000
6,1009,3004,4005,2004,20037373719,0001.85,8002.520,0005,30014,000$100,00031,000
11,00013,00011,00011,00011,00039384028,0002.415,0003.129,00010,00018,000$65,00065,000
15,00018,00016,00016,00016,00039384138,0002.723,0003.239,00021,00016,000$66,00097,000
4,1007,7007,3007,8006,90043424418,0002.38,9002.918,00012,0006,100$91,00039,000
21,00021,00012,00011,0009,90035353543,000212,0002.744,0009,10033,000$58,00083,000
                                          Report > January 201235
Safe Enough to Stay 
Appendix II  northeast quadrant.39 (Engineers dene the lateral acceleration from 
earthquake shaking by comparing it to the vertical acceleration due 
Establishing a pre-earthquake to gravity, or g. Thus, 2.0g, or 200 percent g, means twice the 
acceleration of gravity.) Figure 11 is a map of spectral accelerations 
shelter-in-place evaluation corresponding to the magnitude 7.2 San Andreas scenario earthquake 
contemplated in s proposed resilience objective.40 
engineering standard: A rough comparison of Figures 10 and 11 nds that the scenario 
Technical considerationsvalues (Figure 11) are about 60 percent as large as the code values 
(Figure 10). Code values were computed for 22 locations where 
the Figure 11 contours cross the street grid. For these locations, 
This appendix provides the technical background to support the 
the average ratio between the  scenario accelerations and the 
recommendations made in Section II of this report. In order to 
code values is about 0.57. Adding one standard deviation (0.02) 
establish a pre-earthquake shelter-in-place evaluation engineering 
suggests an appropriately conservative factor of 0.6. (Indeed, given 
standard, we have recommended making use of the national 
the uncertainties involved in the scenario map, a factor with only one 
standard titled Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings,38 also 
signicant gure is warranted.) Again, however, no specic factor is 
known as ASCE 31.
recommended here. Rather, this approach is suggested as a simple 
but appropriate way of adjusting the ASCE 31 criteria to suit a city-
To determine, whether a building has shelter-in-place capacity, 
dened resilience objective. A similar study is recommended to adjust 
the ASCE 31 criteria should be modied to consider only damage 
the ASCE 31 1-second spectral acceleration values.
patterns critical to shelter-in-place capacity with reference to 
approved maps of relevant hazards and expected infrastructure 
performance.Additional notes regarding seismicity and the dened 
seismic hazard:
We have recommended that the ASCE 31 hazard level be reduced t &GGFDUTPUIFSUIBOTIBLJOHGSFRVFODZDPOUFOU
EVSBUJPOPG
by an appropriate factor (we recommend 0.6 as a starting place shaking, follow-on shaking due to aftershocks, etc.  might 
for discussion) to account for the differences between the standard affect the details of performance but are beyond the scope of 
and s scenario of interest (i.e., the expected earthquake). The conventional engineering practice and are thus beyond the scope 
derivation of this factor is explained in further detail below. of the shelter-in-place evaluation effort.
t 5TVOBNJSVOVQDBOCFNBQQFECVUJTOPUSFDPNNFOEFEGPS
Dening the shelter-in-place hazard level: adjustment consideration as part of the shelter-in-place evaluation criteria 
factor for code-based MCE hazardbecause tsunami effects can be related to distant earthquakes and 
are not expected to be signicant for the magnitude 7.2 scenario.
As noted in Section II, we recommend the use of seismic hazard 
t &WFOXJUIBGBDUPSPGBQQMJFEUPUIFDPEFQBSBNFUFST
UIF
parameters given by the building code for new construction and used 
resulting values anywhere within San Francisco would still qualify 
by ASCE 31, reduced by an appropriate factor. The codes parameters 
as high seismicity by ASCE 31 Table 2-1, so the ASCE 31 high 
(referred to as the Maximum Considered Earthquake or MCE) are 
seismicity procedures will still apply.
familiar to engineers and code ofcials, and their use avoids the 
conceptual error of applying a single scenario hazard (which is good 
for citywide planning) to individual properties.Accounting for the effects of local soils
Some ASCE 31 provisions require the determination of site class. 
The adjustment factor should be developed by the city through a Site class is the code term for soil type, from hard rock to soft clay. 
consensus process as it conrms its resilience objective. In concept, To avoid the cost of geotechnical investigation, we recommend 
the factor should be based on a comparison of the codes spectral allowing the use of a DBI-approved map based either on investigation 
acceleration parameters (the quantities most often used by engineers reports approved for previous projects or on research such as that 
to set the size of the design earthquake) to those estimated for the reected by the map in Figure 12. We also recommend allowing the 
scenario or hazard of interest.assumption of Site Class E in areas where the city normally requires 
investigation for new construction projects; this is consistent with the 
For example, consider Figures 10 and 11. Figure 10 is a detail from allowance in ASCE 31 Section 3.5.2.3.1 for Tier 1 evaluation.
the building code map showing short-period spectral acceleration 
values in San Francisco. The values range from 1.5g to 2.0g for 
39  Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures [ASCE/SEI 7-10] 
most of the city, including a uniform 1.5g value for the east side and (American Society of Civil Engineers, 2010): Figure 22-1.
40 Boatwright, J., USGS 0.3 s Pseudo-Acceleration Spectra (%g): capss using 
38  Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings [ASCE/SEI 31-03] (American psa 03, with fault, unpublished map provided to the  Shelter in Place Task 
Society of Civil Engineers, 2003).Force, September 2011.
36   Report > January 2012
Figures 10 and 11: Seismic Valuation
1.5g
80  
2.0g1.5g10 010 0
110    
  90  
130  120  
Detail from the building code map of short-period spectral USGS 0.3 s Pseudo-Acceleration Spectra (%g): capss 
acceleration values for design of new buildings (ASCE, using psa 03, with fault, Sun Jun 20, 2010 05:00:00 
2010, Fig. 22-1). AM PDT  M7.2  N38.18 W122.92  Depth: 0.0km  
ID:cap72fau
Figure 10: The gray lines outline the city and the 
northern portion of San Mateo County. The heavy Figure 11: Short-period spectral acceleration 
black line through the west of the city is the contours within San Francisco corresponding [ASCE/SEI 7-10] (American Society 
2.0g contour. The heavy black line through the to a magnitude 7.2 event on the peninsula Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
center of the city is the 1.5g contour. The shaded segment of the San Andreas Fault.
gray area in the northeast portion of the city is 
uniformly assigned a value of 1.5g. 
Figure 10 Source: and Other Structures of Civil Engineers, 2010): Figure 22-1Figure 11 Source: Jack Boatwright, unpublished map provided to the  Shelter-in-Place Task Force
Figure 12: San Francisco Site Class Map
For possible use in shelter-in-place evaluation
Soil types dened by 
National Earthquake Hazards 
Reduction Program (NEHRP)
Soil types A and B
Rock
Soil type C
Very dense soil or soft rock
Soil type D
Stiff soil
Soil type E
Soft clay
Source: Seekins, Linda C., Jack Boatwright and Tom Fumal, Soil type and shaking hazard in the San Francisco , (U.S. Geological Survey, 1999) http://earthquake.usgs.gov/regional/nca/soiltype/map/
                                          Report > January 201237
Appendix II
Developing additional evaluation criteria for smaller The shelter-in-place criteria described below are a subset and, in 
and larger earthquakessome cases, an extension of ASCE 31 provisions. In general, the 
recommended criteria are derived by considering shelter-in-place 
As discussed above, the  performance objective contemplates a capacity equivalent to conditions that would be expected to receive 
single hazard level. For more robust evaluation results, for comparison an ATC-20/DBI green tag within hours of the design event. That 
with existing standard procedures for safety evaluation, and for the is, a building can be said to have shelter-in-place capacity if it has 
facilitation of more nuanced policy distinctions, it might be useful to no deciencies that contemplate either an ATC-20 red-taggable 
develop additional evaluation criteria related to either larger or smaller damage pattern or a loss of habitability unacceptable to DBI, 
hazards.accounting for the fact that certain habitability requirements are 
expected to be waived at different stages of the recovery period.
For example, use of a larger hazard (such as the full code level 
hazard without the adjustment factor) might help distinguish relatively The following subsections describe a process for modifying or 
brittle structural systems (such as non-ductile concrete) from extending relevant ASCE 31 provisions for each deciency category:
relatively ductile systems (such as wood frame). Many systems will 
perform adequately at the primary hazard level recommended above, A. Critical geotechnical or geologic deciencies
with critical deciencies only manifesting in stronger shaking. This is Geotechnical or geologic deciencies are those related to performance 
why some codes and standards, including the seismic rehabilitation of the soil or ground supporting the structure. ASCE 31 contemplates 
standard known as ASCE 41,41 set performance objectives at three potential geotechnical or geological deciencies: liquefaction, 
two levels. Similarly, liqueable soil might be a much higher risk slope failure and surface fault rupture. We recommend waiving the 
to shelter-in-place performance in the codes MCE event than at surface fault rupture issue, since no fault traces have been identied 
the factored hazard level. Therefore, we recommend the use of a in San Franciscos developed areas.
secondary higher hazard (or other supplemental criteria) for certain 
structure types, such as mid- to high-rise non-ductile concrete.For liquefaction and slope stability, to avoid the cost of geotechnical 
investigation, we recommend allowing the use of a DBI-approved 
Similarly, use of a smaller hazard could help distinguish worst of the map based either on investigation reports approved for previous 
worst buildings from other buildings whose shelter-in-place capacity projects or on research such as that reected by the Liquefaction 
is only marginally inadequate. This distinction could be useful in and Landslide Zones map in Figure 13. To be clear, Figure 13 is 
making loss estimates and in guiding policy decisions by the city and presented here not as nal criteria but as an example of the resources 
mitigation decisions by the building owner. Therefore, we recommend from which the city might derive San Franciscospecic criteria. It 
the use of a secondary lower hazard (or other supplemental criteria) might be tempered, for example, with a map of areas similar to those 
if needed for purposes of policy development. ASCE 31 is currently that experienced signicant lateral spread or settlement in the Loma 
in an update cycle, and the new version is expected to include new Prieta earthquake.
evaluation criteria that address this issue; supplemental shelter-in-
place evaluation criteria could be based on the revised ASCE 31 Whether location in a liqueable area should automatically make a 
provisions as they become available.building shelter-in-place-decient remains an open question to be 
resolved by additional research and by consideration of the citys 
Categories of potential deciencies that could impact selected resilience objective.
shelter-in-place capacity
B. Structural deciencies
Since shelter-in-place performance can be affected by more than Structural deciencies are those related to the walls, frames and other 
just structural performance, we recommend that shelter-in-place structural members meant to resist earthquake forces. Shelter-in-
evaluation criteria consider ve broad categories of potential place capacity requires that a building remain structurally stable to 
deciencies, generally consistent with the scope of ASCE 31:the degree that it would receive an ATC-20 green tag following the 
design event. The relevant ASCE 31 provisions are therefore those 
A. Geotechnical or geologicthat are most closely related to ATC-20s structural criteria, which 
B. Structuralconsider partial or total collapse, signicant out-of-plumbness or 
C. Nonstructuralobvious severe damage to structural elements. Therefore, we
D. Contents
E. Utilities infrastructure
41  Seismic Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings [ASCE/SEI 41-06] (American 
Society of Civil Engineers, 2006).
38   Report > January 2012
Safe Enough to Stay 
Figure 13: Liquefaction and Landslide Zones in San Francisco
Zones of required investigation for liquefaction and earthquake-induced landslides in San Francisco
 
Source: Seismic Hazard Zones, City and County of San Francisco, (California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, November 17, 2000) http://gmw.consrv.ca.gov/shmp/download/pdf/ozn_sf.pdf
1 mile
Liquefaction
Areas where historic occurence indicate a potential for 
permanent ground displacements.
Earthquake-Induced Landslides
Areas where previous occurrence of landslide movement 
indicate a potential for permanent ground displacements.
                                          Report > January 201239
Appendix II
recommend applying only the ASCE 31 Life Safety criteria that with a supplemental structural system, perhaps under old what 
address the following potential deciencies: used to be SFBC Section 104f or other criteria to be established by 
t$POEJUJPOPGNBUFSJBMT	BTBNBUUFSPGEVFEJMJHFODFPOMZ
consensus of the engineering community.
t.BTTJSSFHVMBSJUZt$FSUBJOXPPEGSBNFCVJMEJOHTBSFFMJHJCMFGPSWPMVOUBSZSFUSPmU
t7FSUJDBMEJTDPOUJOVJUZincentives under Department of Building Inspection Administrative 
t8FBLTUPSZBulletin (AB) 094.42 The criteria currently required by AB-094 
t4PGUTUPSZare consistent with ASCE 31 Life Safety structural evaluation. 
t5PSTJPOBMJSSFHVMBSJUZTherefore, a building retrotted in compliance with AB-094 should 
t-PXSFEVOEBODZbe deemed to have adequate shelter-in-place structural capacity. 
t%FnFDUJPOJODPNQBUJCJMJUZ(The forthcoming guideline known as ATC 71-1 or FEMA P-807 is 
t4IPSUDBQUJWFDPMVNOexpected to be cited by AB-094. Assuming it will be adopted with 
t8FBLDPMVNOGSBNFTspecied performance objectives essentially equivalent to ASCE 31 
t*OBEFRVBUFXBMMBODIPSBHFLife Safety structural performance, we expect that compliance with 
t6OCSBDFEXPPEDSJQQMFXBMMTthe updated AB-094 will also be deemed to represent adequate 
t1SFDBTUXJUIPVUUPQQJOHTMBCshelter-in-place structural capacity. However, if the new guideline 
is implemented so as to allow retrots that do not achieve an 
Otherwise, all of the ASCE 31 procedures and options regarding equivalent performance objective, the shelter-in-place adequacy of 
structural evaluation would apply. These include the use of AB-094 will be subject to review.)
benchmarking to demonstrate compliance (ASCE 31 Section 3.2) 
and the use of Tier 2 or Tier 3 procedures to demonstrate compliance C. Nonstructural deciencies
contrary to the deciency indicators of Tier 1.Nonstructural deciencies are those related to building systems other 
than the structure, such as chimneys, elevators, veneer, windows and 
doors, piping and ductwork. Shelter-in-place capacity requires that a 
ASCE Tiered Proceduresbuilding remain safely occupiable to the degree that it would receive 
ASCE 31 provides a series of increasingly sophisticated, or tiered, an ATC-20 green tag following the design event and that it satisfy 
procedures for evaluating buildings. The tiered approach allows a additional post-earthquake habitability requirements as dened in 
useful trade-off between the evaluations certainty and the level Section III of this report. 
of effort (and expense) needed to produce it. Tier 1 involves only 
the use of qualitative checklists and some rough calculations. The ASCE 31 nonstructural provisions relevant to ATC-20 green 
Tier 2 involves a more complete quantitative structural analysis. tagging are those most closely related to hazardous materials release, 
Tier 3 involves a still more thorough, or non-linear analysis. Tier potential res and loosened falling hazards. We recommend applying 
1 is quickest and least expensive. While it is often sufcient to only the ASCE 31 Life Safety and Immediate Occupancy criteria that 
give a good picture of the buildings expected performance, it is a address the following potential deciencies (as dened in ASCE 31):
conservative procedure. More detailed analyses in Tier 2 or Tier 3 t$POEJUJPOPGNBUFSJBMT	BTBNBUUFSPGEVFEJMJHFODFPOMZ

take more effort but are often able to rene the Tier 1 ndings.t)B[BSEPVTNBUFSJBMT
t1BSUJUJPOT	63.PSDFNFOUJUJPVT

t$FJMJOHT	MBUIBOEQMBTUFS

Where San Francisco has policies or regulations in place to address t$MBEEJOHBOEHMB[JOH	JHOPSJOHXFBUIFSSFTJTUBODF

specic structure types, alternate criteria are probably appropriate. t.BTPOSZWFOFFS
We recommend the following applications of existing policies to t1BSBQFUTBOEBQQFOEBHFT
shelter-in-place evaluation, subject to review and consensus by the t.BTPOSZDIJNOFZT
engineering community:t4UBJST
t"UUBDIFEFRVJQNFOU	BTGBMMJOHIB[BSEPOMZ
JHOPSJOHGVODUJPOBMJUZ

t$FSUBJOVOSFJOGPSDFENBTPOSZ	63.
CVJMEJOHTJO4BO'SBODJTDP
are subject to a 1992 mandatory retrot ordinance per regulations The ASCE 31 provisions relevant to post-earthquake habitability 
in Chapters 16A and 16B of the San Francisco Building Code involve a wider set of potential deciencies, including consideration 
(SFBC). In ASCE 31 terms, however, the retrot criteria represent of lighting, HVAC, plumbing, elevators, weather resistance, etc. 
risk reduction only. Prudent as that may be, it does not seek, Importantly, compliance with respect to these issues is linked to a 
let alone ensure with high reliability, safe post-earthquake recovery timeline, with certain requirements being waived in the 
reoccupancy. Therefore, compliance with SFBC Chapters 16A and 
16B is not sufcient to pass a shelter-in-place evaluation. Instead, 42  Denition and Design Criteria for Voluntary Seismic Upgrade of Soft-
a retrotted URM building should be deemed to have adequate Story, Type V (wood-frame) Buildings,. (San Francisco Department of 
Building Inspection. April 13, 2010) http://sfdbi.org/Modules/ShowDocument.
shelter-in-place structural capacity only if it has been retrotted aspx?documentid=919
40   Report > January 2012
Safe Enough to Stay 
immediate post-earthquake period but required as normalcy is example) might delay reoccupancy in a typical house or small 
recovered. A recent report published by the Structural Engineers apartment building. In large residential buildings (with industrial 
Association of Northern California has proposed a way to link ASCE kitchens or central plants, for example) or in mixed-use buildings, 
31 criteria to recovery time.43 We recommend applying its principles other specialty contents might pose shelter-in-place risks.
in coordination with the -proposed habitability timeline.
Therefore, we recommend waiving all contents provisions of ASCE 31 
For example, s proposed shelter-in-place standards call for except for those related to stored hazardous materials. A procedural 
weather protection provided by exterior windows to be restored within provision should be used to invoke supplemental criteria subject to 
seven days of the emergency declaration. In ASCE 31 terms, weather code ofcial approval for cases of mixed occupancy.
protection from windows is addressed implicitly with criteria related 
to glazing or, in some window wall systems, cladding. The Structural E. Utilities infrastructure deciencies
Engineers Association of Northern California report puts glazing in Utilities infrastructure deciencies are those related to services 
the category of components expected to be repairable within days or, provided from outside the building, such as water, gas, electricity, 
for extensive damage to a large building, weeks. With a seven-day sewage removal and telecommunications. The shelter-in-place 
target, a typical building would be able to meet the shelter-in-place capacity of a given residential building can be impacted by the 
standard even if the earthquake did cause glazing damage. Therefore, performance of utility services. s proposed shelter-in-place 
the evaluation criteria need not consider ASCE 31s provisions for standards will generally waive requirements for utilities within a unit 
glazing. In a larger building, or where potential glazing damage would (water, gas, electricity, sewer) while service to the building is down. 
not be repairable in seven days, the glazing details would need to be Still, it will be useful for planning purposes to have some estimate of 
checked.the number and location of the residential units most likely to lose 
services for extended periods. 
Another example: s standards call for gas and electricity 
service to be restored within each unit within 30 days of service to It is impractical to require the evaluator of a single residential building 
the building being restored by PG&E. ASCE 31 addresses a variety to study and draw conclusions about the recoverability of lifelines. 
of related items, from equipment attachment to exible couplings Our proposed solution is for the city and service providers to develop 
in hazardous materials piping. Where the Structural Engineers rough maps sufcient to allow broad relative statements about 
Association of Northern California report indicates that repairs would outages on a neighborhood basis. Presumably, these would be based 
take weeks, the issue would be moot relative to the 30-day target. on considerations such as the presence of brittle piping in liqueable 
Where the anticipated repair would take months, the condition soil, existing plans and prioritizations, etc. Therefore, we recommend 
represents a potential deciency and must be checked.that assessment of shelter-in-place deciency relative to utilities be 
based on maps or inventories of vulnerable infrastructure produced 
Vetting the ASCE 31 criteria in this way is challenging in part because by service providers, by the city or by the San Francisco Lifelines 
residential structure types range from wood or masonry houses to Council.
designated historic apartment buildings to concrete or steel high-
rises. In larger buildings, nonstructural functions are often served by In some cases, alternative services can be provided on a timely and 
specialized components. In smaller vernacular buildings, structural temporary basis while normal service is being restored. To the extent 
elements such as wood-sheathed roofs or stucco walls also affect that such provisions can be reliably predicted or planned for, shelter-
security, weather tightness, re safety, etc., so structural damage in-place evaluation criteria should allow for these as alternative 
thats acceptable under shelter-in-place guidelines might still affect means of compliance.
shelter-in-place capacity.
Application to special residential occupancies
D. Contents decienciess proposed shelter-in-place standards do not apply directly to 
Contents deciencies are those related to such items as furniture, certain residential occupancies providing assisted living and similar 
items stored on shelves, and certain equipment. While contents services. Even for normal residential occupancies, however, some 
damage can impact functional recovery of certain occupancies residents are likely to have disabilities that require accommodations 
and full recovery of most occupancies,44 shelter-in-place impacts such as ramps, elevators, strobe alarms, etc. For these conditions, we 
in typical residential occupancies are expected to be rare. Only recommend the development of supplemental criteria in coordination 
hazardous materials contents (improperly stored solvents, for with the Mayors Ofce on Disability.
43  Bonowitz, D., Resilience Criteria for Seismic Evaluation of Existing 
Buildings, (Structural Engineers Association of Northern California August 5, 
2011) www.seaonc.org/pdfs/SEAONC_SPI_Resilience_110805.pdf
44  Ibid.  
                                          Report > January 201241
Safe Enough to Stay 
Appendix IIIt4NBMMGBNJMZIPNFTBOESFTJEFOUJBMDBSFGBDJMJUJFTGPSUIF 
   chronically ill
Establishing a post-earthquake iv. Buildings containing residential uses in the areas of jurisdiction 
alternative shelter-in-place of the Port of San Francisco and within areas of other jurisdiction, 
unless these standards have been adopted for use in those areas.
housing standardIn post-earthquake periods, residents in the facilities not covered by 
shelter-in-place standards are expected to continue to be provided 
1. Facilities containing certain uses and occupancies with alternative suitable housing that meets all code requirements, or 
are not covered under the alternative standards to otherwise be accommodated in a manner that meets the standards 
outlined in Section III of the responsible agency.
A. Disaster shelters 2. Special building and use requirements when 
This includes those operated by the government, the American Red phased habitability requirements are in effect 
Cross, Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster (VOAD) and other 
private-sector entities.t/PVTFPGmSFQMBDFTGPSPQFOnBNFT
t/PPQFOnBNFTGPSIFBUPSDPPLJOHJOTJEFCVJMEJOHTPUIFSUIBOJO
B.  Residential facilities that are required to meet standards of appliances designed and operated for those purposes
other regulatory agenciest$BOEMFTBOEPUIFSPQFOnBNFTGPSMJHIUJOHPLBZJGXJUIJOQSPUFDUJWF
 Note that residential facilities regulated by other agencies will likely holders (i.e., candles in glasses)
not meet shelter-in-place standards for structural and nonstructural t&MFDUSJDBMFYUFOTJPODPSETBOEPUIFSUFNQPSBSZFMFDUSJDBMFRVJQNFOU
elements. Such other residential facilities include:okay if properly used 
i. Residential facilities dened as R-2.1 or R-4 Occupancies, t/PFMFDUSJDBMHFOFSBUPSTJOTJEFCVJMEJOHT
including assisted living facilities and social rehabilitation facilities t1PSUBCMFFMFDUSJDIFBUFSTPLBZJGDJSDVJUTOPUPWFSMPBEFE
such as:t/PLFSPTFOFPSPUIFSGVFMCVSOJOHIFBUFSTJOTJEF
t3FTJEFOUJBMDBSFGBDJMJUJFTGPSDIJMESFO
BEVMUTPSUIFDISPOJDBMMZJMM
t"EVMUSFTJEFOUJBMGBDJMJUJFT3. Evaluations that can be done in the post 
t$POHSFHBUFMJWJOHIFBMUIGBDJMJUJFTearthquake period
t(SPVQIPNFT
t)BMGXBZIPVTFTA. ATC-20 rapid post-earthquake safety evaluation
t$PNNVOJUZDPSSFDUJPOBMBOESFFOUSZDFOUFSTThe ATC-20 building-evaluation protocol has been in use for over 
t$PNNVOJUZUSFBUNFOUQSPHSBNDFOUFST20 years, and tens of thousands of buildings have been inspected 
t8PSLGVSMPVHIQSPHSBNDFOUFSTaccording to its procedures. Thousands of inspectors have been 
t"MDPIPMJTNPSESVHBCVTFSFDPWFSZPSUSFBUNFOUGBDJMJUJFTtrained in the use of ATC-20.
t*OTQFDUJPOTUPCFEPOFCZUSBJOFEBOEEFQVUJ[FECVJMEJOH
ii. Certain residential care facilities within the R-3 Occupancy    inspectors, engineers and architects.
classication, including adult, child or infant care facilities, and all t.BZEPTIFMUFSJOQMBDFJOTQFDUJPOTXJUIBEEJUJPOBMUSBJOJOH
day-care centers. t%BNBHFUIBUNJHIUSFRVJSFi3FQBJS3FUSPmUwFWBMVBUJPO
JODMVEJOH
   Disproportionate Damage conditions, should be referred for 
iii. Residential care facilities dened as R-3.1 Occupancies. Note 
   further evaluation by a licensed design professional.
that residential care facilities will likely not meet shelter-in-place 
standards for structural and nonstructural elements. These facilities B. ATC-20 detailed post-earthquake inspection
include: The ATC-20 detailed inspection is a part of the overall ATC-20 
t"EVMUSFTJEFOUJBMGBDJMJUJFTinspection program, intended for buildings where additional 
t$POHSFHBUFMJWJOHIFBMUIGBDJMJUJFTinspection/evaluation is needed to reach a conclusion regarding 
t'PTUFSGBNJMZIPNFTsafe reoccupancy.
t(SPVQIPNFTt*OTQFDUJPOTUPCFEPOFCZMJDFOTFEFOHJOFFSTPSBSDIJUFDUT
JO 
t*OUFSNFEJBUFDBSFGBDJMJUJFTGPSUIFEFWFMPQNFOUBMMZEJTBCMFE    accordance with ATC-20.
   (habilitative)ti3FQBJS3FUSPmUwFWBMVBUJPO
JODMVEJOHi%JTQSPQPSUJPOBUF%BNBHFw
t*OUFSNFEJBUFDBSFGBDJMJUJFTGPSUIFEFWFMPQNFOUBMMZEJTBCMFE    evaluation, may be part of the ATC-20 detailed evaluation if 
   (nursing)   this can be achieved through visual evaluation. If not done at the  
t/VSTFSJFTGPSUIFGVMMUJNFDBSFPGDIJMESFOVOEFSUIFBHFPGTJY
    time of the ATC-20 detailed post-earthquake inspection, this 
   but not including infants as dened in SFBC Section 310   must be done as part of a subsequent evaluation by a licensed 
t3FTJEFOUJBMDBSFGBDJMJUJFTGPSUIFFMEFSMZ   design professional.
42   Report > January 2012
Appendix III
C. Engineering evaluationevaluations (on-site or available when required)
These evaluations typically provide an in-depth review of damage t"5$TUSVDUVSBMJOTQFDUJPOTUBGG	POTJUFPSBWBJMBCMFXIFO
to the structure of a building. The results may be used for many required)
purposes, including requests for reclassication, demolition, repair t$PVOTFMJOHTUBGGUPBTTJTUUIPTFTVGGFSJOHGSPNUSBVNBBOYJFUZ	PO
or retrot design and construction, insurance claims, etc. site or immediately available when required) Security assistance
t.BZCFEPOFBUUIFSFRVFTUPGPXOFS
DJUZPSPUIFSBHFODZt"TTJTUBODFJODPPSEJOBUJOHXJUISFMJFGPSHBOJ[BUJPOT
t&WBMVBUJPOTBSFUPCFEPOFCZBMJDFOTFEFOHJOFFSPSBSDIJUFDUt"TTJTUBODFJODPPSEJOBUJOHCVJMEJOHJOTQFDUJPOTBOEQFSNJUTBOE
ti3FQBJS3FUSPmUwFWBMVBUJPO
JODMVEJOHi%JTQSPQPSUJPOBUF repairs
    Damage evaluation, may be part of this engineering evaluation t"TTJTUBODFJONBLJOHSFQBJSTUPNFFUTIFMUFSJOQMBDFTUBOEBSET
    or may be done as a subsequent evaluation.t4NBMMmOBODJBMTFSWJDFT	JG"5.TJOPQFSBUJWF

t6OEFS4BO'SBODJTDP#VJMEJOH$PEF4FDUJPO
BMMt/VSTFSZBOEDIJMEDBSFTFSWJDFT
BOETDIPPMT
   evaluations done by a licensed design professional on buildings t5SBOTQPS UBUJPOIVCTFSWJDFT
XJUIBDDFTTUPUBYJT
QBSBUSBOTJUBOE
   with substantial structural damage must be reported to the buses
   Building Ofcial. t"HFODZSFGFSSBMTBOEDPNNVOJDBUJPOTXJUIDPNNVOJUZTFSWJDF
organizations 
D. Building Occupancy Resumption Program (BORP) inspection  t%JTUSJCVUJPOPGTVQQMJFT
XBUFSBOEGPPE
    and evaluationt'PPETFSWJDF
BTOFFEFE
This is a program under the jurisdiction of the Department of t3FGSJHFSBUJPOGPSDSJUJDBMTVQQMJFT	NFEJDBUJPO
FUD

Building Inspection to allow rapid evaluation of buildings by private t$POOFDUJPOTUPMBVOESZTFSWJDF
design professionals in order to encourage rapid reoccupancy of t&MFDUSJDBMTVQQMZ
JODMVEJOHFMFDUSPOJDTDIBSHJOHGBDJMJUJFT
buildings. Certain city-owned/-occupied buildings also fall under t1FUBOEBOJNBMTFSWJDFDPPSEJOBUJPO
the BORP program.t4QBDFBOEPSHBOJ[BUJPOGPSDPPSEJOBUJPOXJUITIFMUFST
DJUZ
t#031FWBMVBUJPOTSFQSFTFOUBTQFDJBMDBTFPG"5$ agencies, volunteers and other social services and support 
   rapid evaluations and are subject to the requirements of such agencies
   inspections, except as modied here.t-JOLTUPBTTJTUBODFGPSUIPTFXJUITQFDJBMOFFET
t&WBMVBUJPOTPGMJTUFECVJMEJOHTBSFUPCFEPOFCZMJDFOTFEt-JOLTUPUSBOTMBUJPOTFSWJDFT
   engineers or architects based on a preapproved inspection t$JUZTUBGGBOEPSPUIFSQSPGFTTJPOBMPSTVQFSWJTFEWPMVOUFFS
   program.management
t5IFTFQSJWBUFJOTQFDUPSTIBWFBVUIPSJUZUPBQQMZDJUZUBHTt1PMJDJFTBOEPQFSBUJPOTUIBUQSPIJCJUEJTDSJNJOBUJPOBOEQSPWJEF
t#031FWBMVBUJPOTNBZJODMVEFBi3FQBJS3FUSPmUwFWBMVBUJPO
unrestricted access for those with disabilities
   including a Disproportionate Damage evaluation, or this may t&NFSHFODZ
CBTJDBOENBKPSNFEJDBMDBSF
   be done as a subsequent evaluation.t0UIFSOFDFTTBSZBTTJTUBODFTVQQMFNFOUBMUPTIFMUFSJOQMBDF
t#031FWBMVBUJPOTNVTUCFTVCNJUUFEUPUIFDJUZQFS4'#$
   3405.2.1. 5. Future research needed
E. Insurance inspections and other private inspections
t/PSFRVJSFNFOUTPSDPOUSPMOPPGmDJBMVTFPSEBNBHFQPTUJOHTBSFReview of post-earthquake elevator operation and restarting rules 
required to be done by these inspectors.and procedures, especially related to buildings over four stories 
t*GJOTVSBODFPSPUIFSQSJWBUFJOTQFDUJPOTBSFEPOFCZMJDFOTFEThis should examine the overall issue of elevator usability, disability 
design professionals, evaluations may include Repair/Retrot access and other special needs.
evaluation, including a Disproportionate Damage evaluation, or Coordination of shelter-in-place phased habitability requirements 
this must be done as a subsequent evaluation.with expected utility and lifeline restoration 
t&WBMVBUJPOT
JGEPOFCZMJDFOTFEEFTJHOQSPGFTTJPOBMT
NVTUCFCoordination with the Lifelines Council is necessary to assure that 
submitted to the city per SFBC 3405.2.1.the phased standards as proposed are reasonable. Specically, the 
Lifelines Council should provide guidance on sewage and related 
4. Neighborhood support centershuman waste disposal issues.
Neighborhood support centers will have to provide many services, or Determination of how to ensure disability access in the post-
contact to services, that residents will need to continue to shelter in earthquake period
place. These include the following: The city must further review issues related to persons with 
t*OGPSNBUJPO
OFXTBOEHFOFSBMOFJHICPSIPPEDPNNVOJDBUJPOBOEdisabilities, including but not limited to mobility impairment.
contact
t5FMFQIPOF
EJHJUBM
QPTUBMTFSWJDFTBOEPUIFSDPNNVOJDBUJPO
providers
t7PMVOUFFSTUPBTTJTUJOQSPWJEJOHTIFMUFSJOQMBDFJOGPSNBUJPOBOE
                                          Report > January 201243
Ideas + action for a better city
The mission of  is to promote good 
planning and good government through 
research, education and advocacy. 
 is a member-supported nonprot 
organization. Join us. 
www..org

654 Mission Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
tel. 415.781.8726
info@.org
The Culture of Preparedness
Geologists predict that a major or catastrophic earthquake will strike the  in the
coming years  in our lifetime. Tens of thousands of San Franciscans may be unable  or
unwilling  to shelter-in-place in their homes or places of business. They will need
emergency shelter, water, food and other services immediately. Hospitals will be
damaged and health care workers overwhelmed by those seeking care. Electricity, gas,
water and telephone service will be disrupted. Businesses will cease operations. Roads
and bridges will be closed and San Francisco will be cut off from disaster relief aid,
stranding tens of thousands of commuters and visitors unable to evacuate or return
home. First responders  fire, police, and medical  will be stretched beyond
comprehension as they fight raging conflagrations, major and minor fires; seek and
rescue numerous victims in the rubble; patrol critical facilities and maintain law and
order; and attempt to cope with thousands of casualties.
San Francisco will be become an island.
San Francisco must be prepared to survive and respond to such a calamity with only the
resources available at the time, and to recover quickly in the days and weeks afterward,
restoring vital infrastructure and the economy. As San Francisco's major citizens
planning organization, 's (San Francisco Planning and Urban Research
Association's) mission is to promote good planning and good government. In keeping
with that mission,  is examining the readiness of the City and County of San
Francisco to protect its population in the event of such a disaster.
The challenges are great, but San Francisco has survived major disasters before and can
do so again. We can learn lessons from our local history as well as from recent disasters
in other regions of the world. We must be ready to incorporate the knowledge and best
practices used in worldwide disaster planning and recovery to prepare and train
ourselves.  currently has three task forces studying preparedness and response to a
major earthquake striking the : the Hazard Mitigation Task Force, the
Rebuilding Task Force and the Disaster Preparedness Task Force.
The objective of the Disaster Preparedness Task Force is to examine the city's ability to
meet the needs of its residents where they live and work in the immediate aftermath of a
disaster, and to address what individuals and neighborhoods must do to prepare. The
Task Force has spent months interviewing city officials and planners, reviewing
emergency response plans and supporting documents, and researching community
preparedness efforts around the  and in other cities and countries around the
world.
This report, the first in a series of the Disaster Preparedness Task Force's policy papers,
addresses the most critical element of citywide emergency preparedness: establishing
and maintaining a "Culture of Preparedness." To be prepared San Franciscans must
receive comprehensive education on the expected effects of disaster and how best to
respond. They should be trained and ready to care for family members, assist their
neighbors and work effectively in teams and alongside first responders and other
emergency workers. Residents will need adequate stores of water, food and supplies
throughout the city to support a citywide response. Comprehensive public disaster
education and neighborhood-based training and resource coordination are necessary for
engaging all residents of the city in an ongoing preparedness effort.
Are we prepared? Can San Francisco establish a Culture of Preparedness and become a
disaster resilient city? The first step toward a Culture of Preparedness is individual
awareness and self-reliance. The second step is community awareness, cooperation,
planning and preparedness.  urges all residents and workers in the city to begin
individual preparedness by creating personal preparedness plans and disaster kits. To
encourage individual preparedness and create a community of preparedness, 
believes the city must implement specific public policy actions.  addresses a
number of these public policy issues and includes recommendations in this paper to
encourage further discussion and action.
 recommends
Creating a Culture of Preparedness
Strengthening NERT, a Program Critical to Neighborhood Preparedness and
Response
Supplying NERTDisaster Supply And Equipment Caches: A Disaster Story
Integrating Spontaneous Volunteers into Emergency Response
Establishing Community Disaster Response Hubs
Improving Public Information in the Neighborhoods
Supporting Community Organizations Working With Neighborhoods for Disaster
Preparedness and Response
 believes that preparedness is a constant, never-ending process of education about
earthquakes, training and practicing disaster response skills, neighborhood-based
planning, and strategically placing adequate disaster supplies throughout the city.
Continuous engagement in preparedness activities will result in San Francisco becoming
a disaster resilient city. The time is now. The need to be better prepared is urgent. 
hopes that articulating and putting a voice to the issues will help move earthquake
preparedness forward in San Francisco.
INTRODUCTION
In Fiscal Year 2008/09 and subsequent years, the Department of Emergency
Management (DEM) intends to emphasize community disaster preparedness and
response. The City and County of San Francisco bases its emergency response planning
and preparedness on the "All-Hazards Strategy" approach emanating from the federal
government and funded, in part, by the Department of Homeland Security. Although
All-Hazards focuses on the emerging potential of terrorismchemical, biological,
radiological, nuclear and explosive incidents or CBRNEthe strategy enables San
Francisco to cope with a range of disasters. Without speculating on San Francisco's
vulnerability from a terrorist attack,  notes that the U. S. Geological Survey
estimates a probability of two chances in three that a damaging earthquake will occur in
the  in the next thirty years. The All-Hazards strategy satisfies multiple disaster
preparedness and response purposes, including equipment acquisition, training, drills,
and exercises and in planning to respond. Although certain CBRNE incidents require
specialized training and equipment as well as federal and state incident response, the
All-Hazards strategy emphasizes the inter-dependence between disaster approaches and
assumes that broad preparedness will meet the requirements of a specific incident.
This  policy paper's focus on community and neighborhood preparedness and
response during a catastrophic incident coincides with the city's increased interest.
 and the city agree that introducing preparedness and response to the grassroots
level leads to positive outcomes during a disaster. Further Disaster Preparedness Task
Force reports will continue to amplify the city's increased emphasis on the community in
disaster planning and preparedness.
CREATING A CULTURE OF PREPAREDNESS
The 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake, the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the Katrina and Rita
Hurricanes and the 2007 Oil Spill in San Francisco Bay have successively substantiated
that disasters are unpredictably amorphous, requiring a structured flexibility in the
preparedness and response of emergency workers and the community as a whole. Even
with optimal preparation, history demonstrates that chaotic conditions assure
breakdowns in the best-laid plans. For self-sustaining emergency preparedness and
response, all resources need greater integration and strategic investments. This is not
because of a lack of vigorous planning or funding, especially with the 's known
seismic risk and the spike in Homeland Security grants.
Throughout history, regardless of lessons learned from earlier calamities, societies
become gradually lulled into complacency. In our research, we have found several
countries that have ingrained emergency planning into their society's everyday life.
Japan, with one of the world's most active earthquake zones, and Cuba, with its annual
hurricane dangers, each engages its citizenry in preparedness and response. All citizens,
in addition to disaster professionals, can embrace defined emergency roles and duties.
Lessons Gained: As a starting point, there is no need for San Francisco to "reinvent
the wheel". From proven successes found throughout the world, we can adopt the
simplest and lowest-cost programs that have the best chance for long-term
sustainability. In massive disasters, initiative and action arise first by the survivors at the
individual, family and neighborhood level, especially if they are cut off from
governmental services because government is overwhelmed.
Residents at the Ready: Our primary investment may well be in the preparedness of
residentswho can "snap into action", effectively utilizing the readied resources and
infrastructure around them. Over-dependence on government stymies individual self-
help and initiative. In the 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake, ordinary citizens teamed with
firefighters to stretch fire hoses from the waterfront to burning buildings. In the 1989
Cypress Freeway Collapse, nearby citizens were the first to rescue trapped motorists. In
virtually all major disasters, people spontaneously arise to heroic levels, and necessarily
so, when time is crucial and disaster workers are not available. Like a naval ship, where
large crews constantly train and drill for every conceivable situation, the totality of a
city's emergency response could be rehearsed and therefore be universally automatic.
Empowerment: Within a given structure, flexibility and initiative is necessary.
Disaster professionals, communities and individuals need a sense of responsibility to
address dynamic problems. Professional, emerging and potential leaders in
neighborhoods need to be tapped and pre-trained prior to disasters in case traditional
societal order breaks down. An integrated resourcefulness needs to be nurtured
flexible, fluid and adaptive. History demonstrates that heroics and leadership can arise
from many points in the society. The city needs to convey a strong message advocating
individual, family, and neighborhood empowerment, with first-responders,
public/private partnerships, and nonprofit groups working together.
Self-Sustaining Emphasis: Money need not be the primary mover of preparedness.
Recently, increased emergency planning, technology and resources have been a function
of federal Homeland Security funding. As funding declines, projects, personnel and
sustaining maintenance will be diminished. Instead, existing institutions and their
existing resources can be better incorporated into a culture of preparedness, developing
a societal sense of responsibility.
Planting Seeds: Individual, neighborhood and institutional initiative is a no-cost
sustainer of emergency planning. The U.S. Congressional Study on the Katrina
Hurricane Response was entitled "A Failure of Initiative", highlighting that simple
concepts can trigger large benefits. With proper nurturing, seeds of initiative induce a
ripple effect of self-sustaining emergency awareness that engages residents,
neighborhoods, workplaces, building complexes and transient populations. Small,
incremental investments in neighborhoods and individuals can grow self-sustaining
assets that are not dependent on federal funds and city budgets.
STRENGTHENING NERT, A PROGRAM CRITICAL TO NEIGHBORHOOD
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
Images from the Loma Prieta earthquake of survivors pulling fire hoses in the Marina,
rescuing people from collapsed South of Market buildings and off the pan caked Cypress
Freeway underscore the fact that, in a disaster, survivors will be the first responders. The
Annals of Emergency Medicine estimates that after the Loma Prieta earthquake 3% or
thousands of San Francisco residents became spontaneous rescuers, participating ad hoc
in uncoordinated search and rescue efforts, putting them in harm's way and potentially
becoming victims themselves.
Trained and prepared residents could effectively assist first responders after a disaster
without running unnecessary risk to themselves and others. The Neighborhood
Emergency Response Team (NERT) program trains San Franciscans to do just that.
Since its inception in 1990, approximately 17,000 San Franciscans have taken the basic
NERT course given by the San Francisco Fire Department (SFFD).
NERT is about personal and family readiness, neighbors helping neighbors, and "doing
the greatest good for the greatest number". It is a positive and realistic approach to
emergency and disaster situations where citizens will initially be on their own and their
actions in a disaster can make a significant difference in saving lives, protecting property
and helping to bring order out of chaos. The city and 's goal is to strengthen
NERTs to be effective, self-sufficient and self-activating teams during the critical first
days of a disaster.
NERTs supplement first responder services  police, fire, and medical  offering
immediate help to victims at the grassroots level. When the number of trapped people in
buildings and collapsed structures exceed the city's capacity to respond, NERT can work
with other survivors, who often have the most current information about the location of
the missing, to conduct light search and rescue and provide austere disaster medical
assistance (maintain airway, stop bleeding, prevent shock). They are trained to do so
safely.
The basic NERT Training Program is a 20-hour comprehensive program consisting of
six class sessions taught by professional firefighters. Through training, citizens prepare
themselves and their families to cope with disasters both at home and at the workplace.
They have hands-on training to develop skills, including training on the following: when
and how to turn off utilities; how to control small fires; how to manage the three most
frequent killers of victims by opening airways, controlling bleeding and treating for
shock; how to administer basic first aid and triage; how to search for and rescue victims
safely; and ways to effectively organize themselves and spontaneous and registered
volunteers. Post-training evaluations rank both the quality and usefulness of the NERT
training as excellent, and there is no cost for this valuable training.
Besides this initial training, NERT offers advanced training, leadership and team
building, Incident Command Systems (ICS), amateur radio licensing and radio
operations, and. NERT encourages its volunteers to take Red Cross First Aid and other
disaster preparedness and response courses. Many NERTs are also involved in Red
Cross and other disaster relief organizations. Retaining NERTs, while maintaining and
advancing their skills, is an ongoing challenge. Although some participants in the NERT
program may not maintain their skills, of the 17,000 who have completed the NERT
training, SFFD estimates approximately 9,000 individual active NERTs in the city today.
To remain active, NERTs must maintain their skills through neighborhood team drills
and advanced NERT training. NERT has a very active training program and stays in
touch with neighborhood NERT groups to keep volunteer skills current, holds district
training meetings and requires biennial recertification.
NERT believes that involvement in pre-disaster planning and preparedness motivates
residents to make a difference at home, in the neighborhood and the workplace
following a disaster and wishes to reach out to those who do not complete the full basic
course, yet want to have a way to assist their immediate community after a disaster.
NERT and Project Safe have recently begun a Block Captain program aimed at these
individuals.
In addition to the lack of trained active NERTs in the city, NERTs are not geographically
dispersed throughout the city. Less than a third of the city's identified neighborhoods
have an active NERT group, making the effect of NERT vary considerably from
neighborhood to neighborhood. In particular, NERT teams do not exist in many
neighborhoods including some of the most resource-poor and vulnerable. The biggest
obstacle to developing and maintaining a NERT Team in each neighborhood is finding
residents willing to assume the role of Team Coordinator.
 examined the NERT basic training, retraining, drill and exercise
participation programs and  recommends that to expand and sustain
the NERT program, retain, train and maintain active NERT volunteers and
to improve NERT training, the city:
Develop a plan to provide training and establish NERT teams in all neighborhoods
of San Francisco, with an emphasis on reaching low income, non-English speaking,
disabled and vulnerable populations.
Increase the number of NERT exercises and drills to improve skill level and
practice training.
Identify grants to fund enhanced training.
Increase outreach to NERTs through its website by providing technical support to
improve the website, so NERT can utilize e-mails more effectively to update
volunteers on preparedness tips and new skill topics. The city could seek private
sector website designers to assist.
Increase NERT staff to support more basic and advanced NERT training, create
drill opportunities, and work with the volunteer NERT leadership to improve
program effectiveness.
Allocate additional General Funds to Block Captain courses in neighborhoods,
schools, and businesses.
Widespread participation in drills is an essential part of a vibrant disaster planning and
preparedness program. Drills hone skills and ensure that responders are operationally
aware of the plan and the roles they play. While NERTs participate in district NERT
training, exercises, and recertification programs, unfortunately only a few hundred
NERTs participate in the citywide drills, although this number increases each year.
The city holds citywide exercises twice a year, plus a number of smaller drills and
exercises involving more than one city department and/or category of first responders.
The Department of Emergency Management initiates and directs many of these drills
and exercises. Full participation of NERT in citywide and regional planning and
exercises would not only increase NERT volunteers' skill levels, but would help integrate
NERTs into citywide response plans.
Drills enable planners to identify shortcomings in existing emergency plans and to
correct deficiencies in operations. By practicing the and experiencing the skills of NERTs
through citywide disaster drills, disaster planners can refine and plan for the ways in
which they can use NERT successfully during a disaster. By working along side NERTs
in drills, first responders can learn to value NERTs as first responders. Familiarity with
NERT capabilities gained through full NERT participation in exercises with first
responders would help NERT gain the acceptance required to better serve the city.
Recognition of the skills that NERTs can contribute to disaster response would enable
the professionals to function in more complex disaster incidents and reduce the stress
on their scarce resources.
In addition, full integration of NERT into the city's emergency response plans is
essential now more than ever because city emergency response planners are considering
expanding NERT's role to include participation in civic events and environmental
incidents. Until now, NERT has served as a standby group of trained volunteers waiting
to jump automatically into action when the "Big One" strikes. Although not all NERTs
would want to move beyond the basic training, there are many additional NERT disaster
response tasks possible. Beyond its current mission to self-deploy only in the event of an
earthquake, NERT could become a resource for assistance in large oil spills, power
outages, and transportation and health incidents. Some NERTs could be trained in
traffic control or more complex light search and rescue.
Giving NERTs the opportunity to be continuously involved in civic activities may help
retain NERTs and, most importantly, could give them opportunities to practice and
enhance their skills. NERT is part of SFFD and SFFD conducts the highly praised NERT
training program. Commendably, the mayor's budget has requested increased General
Fund resources for NERT training, which will require extra staff. If advanced training
includes educational modules for activities beyond the traditional NERT functions, that
training could be conducted by other than firefighters.
Other municipalities have expanded their trained volunteer programs. (In other
communities, regionally and nationally, NERT is known as Community Emergency
Response Team (CERT).) New York City and Washington DC have taken this approach
with their CERTs. Other volunteer disaster relief organizations utilize cross training of
volunteers as well. For example, the Red Cross, albeit a much larger, better-funded and
multi-purpose organization, trains volunteers for site-specific and mobile roles, but then
cross trains them to fill other roles when needed. San Francisco Red Cross Disaster
Action Team volunteers, who are trained to assist clients at local fires, also are trained to
open shelters, work with first responders and operate canteens. Some local Red Cross
volunteers take national disaster assignments at floods, hurricanes, tornados and other
major disasters. These opportunities help Red Cross volunteers to practice their skills in
real life situations.
If NERT gains an expanded staff, NERT will need office space beyond the space allotted
to it by the SFFD. DEM has additional space available and is willing to house NERT
staff.  believes NERT could benefit from being more broadly integrated into the
emergency planning and preparedness activities of the city by having some staff work
from the Department of Emergency Management. NERT staff occupying office space
within DEM could promote better collaboration and provide a platform to move NERT
into a broader set of responsibilities.
 believes that the city's emergency response planners must integrate
NERT more thoroughly into its emergency planning and preparedness
whether or not it decides to expand NERTs role.  recommends that, to
integrate NERTs as fully participating first responders, while maintaining
the current effective working relationship between NERT and SFFD, the
city:
Integrate NERT into city disaster planning and drills, including desktop exercises,
field exercises, and statewide drills such as Golden Guardian.
Co-locate DEM and SFFD NERT staff to improve cooperation, resource sharing and
effectiveness.
Hold periodic meetings of NERT volunteer leadership and SFFD staff with CERTs
in other  counties, Red Cross Disaster Action Teams, Salvation Army and
other disaster response NGOs to exchange information and program ideas and to
expand volunteer recruitment and retention.
Conduct joint drills and exercises with other regional governmental entities.
The city could then expand NERT's role, if the city had successfully
strengthened NERT to include more trainees, obtained adequate funding,
and sustained the basic NERT program. To accomplish this, 
recommends that the city:
Allocate General Funds for advanced NERT training.
Identify grants to fund advanced NERT training.
Increase NERT staff to organize advanced NERT training and drill opportunities.
Create differentiated roles for NERTs.
Develop methods of notifying and activating NERT volunteers for non-earthquake
assignments.
The city has a stated goal of increasing trained NERT volunteers to 50,000. If it wishes
to accomplish this, it needs to enhance the visibility of the NERT program and develop
programs to tap more volunteer resources.
To develop the Culture of Preparedness and to expand the ranks of NERT, the city
should find ways to encourage young people to join the program. As the city's future
citizens, students should be prepared to live and work in earthquake country. NERT can
reach into the school system to encourage students to train for NERT, and NERT's
practical and hands-on skills development would be of interest to students. Some high
schools have Red Cross clubs and many have Junior Reserve Officer Training programs
that could provide the foundation for NERT training within the schools. Student
instruction on preparedness at all levels could motivate their families to be prepared and
trained, as well. Proposition H, which was voter-approved in March 2004, earmarks
funds for general education purposes. The city could earmark a portion of this annual
allocation to finance disaster preparedness and NERT training.
 recommends that the city:
Support state legislation encouraging high school students to complete
NERT/CERT courses as a graduation requirement.
Designate a portion of the city's contribution to the school district for NERT
courses tailored to high school students.
In the case of a declared emergency, all city employees automatically become Disaster
Service Workers (DSWs). Another way to expand NERT is to train DSWs as NERTs. Not
only would DSWs be better able to take care of their families and neighbors in a disaster,
but they would also be more effective in their work as disaster responders. In addition,
they would be better able to concentrate on their city disaster work because they could
be confident that the "home front" is safe and coping well with the disaster.
In order to facilitate the growth of NERT,  recommends the city:
Increase NERT staff to help market NERT.
Support NERT/SFFD staff to use the NERT website effectively to attract new
volunteers.
Allocate additional General Funds for a new course on management of spontaneous
volunteers.
Solicit the support of marketing firms to promote NERT training to individuals,
businesses, neighborhood and faith-based groups.
Encourage city workers to take NERT training.
For many citizens, NERT will be their first contact point to receive assistance. To be
effective, NERT requires up to date information and maps to direct citizens to
appropriate emergency services. During the disaster, this information should be kept
current.
In advance of an incident, SFFD and DEM, working with NERT volunteer leaders, could
identify mission critical information and equipment that should be available for
training, drills and NERT staging areas. This includes disaster equipment, emergency
priority street maps, and supplies for field triage and treatment.
As the incident proceeds, NERT staging areas and leadership should receive current
information from DEM and SFFD about the status of the disaster, resource allocation,
and problems. For instance, post-quake USGS shake intensity maps could guide search
and rescue, and location of Red Cross and City shelter sites is important for survivor
referral. Obviously, sensitive information would not be distributed to the public.
 recommends that the city:
Develop a plan for SFFD and DEM to communicate essential information more
effectively to NERT both before a disaster and during a disaster response.
SUPPLYING NERTDISASTER SUPPLY AND EQUIPMENT CACHES:
A DISASTER STORY
On a cold rainy Thursday at 2:10 pm, the "expected" 7.2 magnitude earthquake strikes
along the San Andreas Fault, shaking and collapsing commercial and residential
buildings throughout the 10-county San Francisco . Telephone poles and
building ornaments crash to the ground, buildings collapse, and freeways pan cake
killing or injuring thousands. Survivors struggle to aid others in their workplace, in the
streets and in their neighborhoods. Police, fire and medical services are overwhelmed.
Chaos ensues. Some order is brought to the chaos as thousands of NERT-trained San
Franciscans self-activate. First, as they are trained to do, they secure their immediate
environmenthome, workplace or wherever they happen to be. Then they survey the
nature of the disaster. Because they are trained "first responders," other survivors soon
look to them as leaders. NERTs then assemble their own rescue gear or "go kits"water,
food, limited first aid supplies, flashlight, hardhat, vest and survival gear-- and move to a
NERT staging area for further assignments.
Unfortunately, the only mission-critical NERT supplies and equipment NERTs find at
the staging areaother than their own personal gearis a suitcase of NERT reporting
forms necessary for tracking incidents and assignments. A fellow NERT has brought this
case from the Fire Department Battalion Headquarters station some distance away.
NERTs struggle to carry out their mission hampered by the fact that they lack sufficient
supplies and equipment.
In the meantime, across the Bay, the Berkeley Community Emergency Response Teams
(CERTs) access the Berkeley Community Supply Program disaster caches located at
nearby residences or community facilities. They take their cache radios and fan out into
their neighborhood, surveying, reporting damage, requesting additional support, and
rendering assistance. With CERT fire suppression equipment, they fight small fires that
could spread if left uncontrolled. They tend to the injured with cache first aid supplies. A
neighborhood support area with a generator and protective canopy becomes a focal
point for neighbors seeking assistance and survivors wanting to volunteer.
As a result, Berkeley CERTs with training and disaster duties similar to San Francisco
NERTs are able to fulfill their critical "first responder" mission more effectively than San
Francisco NERTs.
To obtain and keep the Berkeley disaster caches, CERTs maintain a minimum
neighborhood staffing level for each cache, commit to training twice a year in their
neighborhoods, identify residents with special needs, and assess neighbor capabilities
such as medical skills. Using their own funds, a number of CERT groups have added to
their neighborhood caches, thereby enhancing their capacity to support the
neighborhood. Berkeley city officials and CERT leaders find that the caches encourage a
culture of preparedness in neighborhoods because the program requires neighborhoods
to organize and maintain a level of preparedness.
Initially, Berkeley Community Supply Program purchased eight large caches at $13,000
per unit and located them in public and community buildings. Now, in order to extend
community disaster capacity response, the Program has purchased upwards of 40
neighborhood CERT caches at $3,000 per unit. San Francisco NERT's lack of
geographically dispersed disaster supplies and equipment is a serious problem. NERTs
only have their personal "go-kits." These kits are not adequate to provide first aid to
victims, conduct search and rescue, support a NERT staging area, and communicate
with the SFFD battalion.
San Francisco officials need to trust that neighborhood NERT teams can manage
disaster caches. With disaster caches to support them, neighborhoods can become more
self-reliant in a disaster. This can free the city to respond to other emergencies requiring
greater professional and resource capabilities.
 strongly recommends that the city:
Purchase, with General Funds, at least 100 neighborhood disaster supply and
equipment caches to support NERT staging areas, neighborhood NERT teams,
other NERT trained groups, and Community Disaster Response Hubs. An
agreement between the city and the NERT team or other neighborhood group
would support the cache distribution by addressing the safeguarding, maintenance
and training necessary for effective utilization of the cache. San Francisco could
model the program on the Berkeley best practice model.
INTEGRATING SPONTANEOUS VOLUNTEERS
INTO EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Across the globe, disaster survivors emerge as spontaneous volunteers to rescue victims,
provide first aid, work in shelters, distribute food and water, and participate in many
emergency response activities. They are most likely to be untrained and to be
unaffiliated with any disaster relief organization, and yet they are a valuable resource.
These volunteers are known amongst emergency planners as convergent, emergent,
unsolicited or unaffiliated volunteers, as well as "spontaneous" volunteers. City disaster
response planners should develop a program to channel the services of these volunteers
into productive response and recovery tasks.
Survivors will recognize NERT volunteers with their yellow hard hats and orange vests
as disaster response leaders in their neighborhood. In many instances, NERTs will be
the only source of immediate disaster response. Survivors wanting to help are likely to
gravitate toward NERTs, as well as to other first responders, putting the trained
responders in a difficult situation. How will the city's first responders use spontaneous
volunteers productively and safely when disaster strikes?
In city disaster plans, the Department of Human Resources (DHR) is currently
responsible for registering disaster volunteers. DHR is planning to set up a centrally
located registry site for unaffiliated volunteers. Realistically, during a disaster, volunteer
registration will take time to organize. In addition, many spontaneous volunteers will
not want to trek across town to a central location to be registered. They are likely to "do
their own thing" because they see the urgency of responding in their neighborhood.
Ideally, spontaneous volunteers should register so trained disaster personnel can assess
their skill sets and aptitudes prior to assignment. In addition, these spontaneous
volunteers could injure themselves rendering aid, becoming new "victims," and they
should be covered by Workers Compensation when performing duties on behalf of the
city. To best utilize and protect spontaneous volunteers, the registration sites should be
located in neighborhoods. Within hours of the incident, these multiple registration sites
should be staffed by pre-assigned DHR personnel and DSWs to register and assign
volunteers.
In the recent Cosco Busan oil spill, spontaneous volunteers hit the beaches without
guidance, training or support to clean up the spill. Spontaneous volunteers are highly
motivated; they want to make a difference when disaster strikes. State and local agencies
were slow to recognize and channel this human resource. The city had no mechanism to
activate NERT, its trained volunteers, in this real-life disaster.
In the first few hours of a major disaster, the city emergency response planners need to
have a functioning spontaneous volunteer program. Some volunteer organizations have
developed programs for integrating spontaneous volunteers, including the Red Cross
and the San Francisco's Project Homeless Connect program. The Red Cross is
experienced in bringing spontaneous volunteers into shelter, bulk food and water
distribution operations, and intake of survivors and related disaster activities. The Red
Cross may be able to provide valuable insights on how to integrate volunteers into
effective disaster programs. Project Homeless Connect utilizes spontaneous volunteers
and can provide additional information in how to use spontaneous volunteers.
 recommends that the city:
Establish a simple and rapid registration policy for DEM , DHR and NERT, to train
and integrate spontaneous volunteers into disaster response and recovery.
Plan for DHR to open multiple registration locations rapidly, preferably adjacent to
NERT staging areas and other city operated response locations.
Instruct DEM and all city departments including NERT to identify in advance of
the event appropriate roles and tasks to assign emergent volunteers, based upon
each individual's skills.
Train first responders, NERTs and city department personnel in managing
spontaneous volunteers, including assigning and supporting them in appropriate
tasks. In addition, field guidance "flash cards" could delineate task assignments for
orienting emergent volunteers to be safe and effective in the performance of their
work.
ESTABLISHING COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE HUBS
To assist communities to prepare for a disaster and to improve emergency response, the
Department of Public Health for the City and County of San Francisco has obtained a
federal grant to create Community Disaster Response Hubs or field-based disaster
coordination centers throughout the city.
The "hub" model is a common means of administering emergency response. In case of a
major disaster in San Francisco, a variety of organizations and public entities will rely on
the hub model to direct response activities. For example, the Red Cross will use the hub
system to coordinate shelter and other services; the Department of Public Health will
use a similar model to direct medical care. The city's Department of Emergency
Management, first responders, representatives from community organizations, along
with the Department of Public Health, have developed a draft proposal to establish
Community Disaster Response Hubs (Community Hubs) as a conduit between city
government and the communities.
Community Hubs can provide the infrastructure for community response to major
emergencies by bringing together community organizations, businesses, faith-based
entities and neighborhood organizations. Together they can identify local resources,
construct a plan to integrate and coordinate those resources with each other and with
the city, and practice communication. The Community Hubs will perform an
administrative function  they are not meant to be service centers. Their role is limited
two primary functions:
1. Information Coordination  They will act as the city government's portal within
each specific affected community, as communication centers to facilitate the exchange of
information between the EOC and the local community regarding available and needed
resources and available and needed services.
2. Resource Coordination  They will identify and assess available resources and
shortfalls and, where shortfalls exist, communicate those needs to the EOC to facilitate
resource deployment to the appropriate community site. Community Hubs activate
immediately after the emergency event, staffed by city employees with the assistance of
registered and trained volunteers who represent participating organizations.
Community Hubs will not replace any emergency operation in the Strategic Plan; rather
they will be an "add-on," taking advantage of resources that already exist in local
communities and radiating out into each community to help match identified needs with
city resources. Ironically, although the city will initiate the Community Hub program
and the city will facilitate its planning and assist in sustaining it, the leadership and
commitment to maintain and sustain the program in each district must come from the
local community or the program will fail. Success depends upon active community
involvement and continued commitment by the City and County of San Francisco.
City Government: San Francisco engages in comprehensive planning to prepare
response to and recovery from an earthquake. The city's Strategic Plan provides for
the city to engage all its public entities to restore lifelines, manage structural
assessment, and supply mass care, including shelter, food and emergency medicine.
The city's command structure will be an Incident Command System (ICS) following
the National Incident Management System (NIMS). In the event of a major
disaster, the EOC will activate immediately and will become the focal point for
coordinated command and control of citywide response efforts. Participants will
include representatives from all departments with a major disaster response role.
The EOC operates as a multi-agency, multi-department coordinated command,
providing support and communication to control citywide response efforts.
Communities: At the same time, a variety of non-governmental organizations,
including local businesses, faith-based organizations, community associations and
medical facilities, make up local communities throughout the city. Many of these
organizations have considerable resources at their command, including expertise,
able personnel and volunteers. The strength and variety of these groups and their
resources vary from community to community. The extent to which organizations
and leaders within local communities in San Francisco have identified these
resources and developed a coordinated local response plan also varies. Specific
entities have developed their own internal earthquake plans. Even in the most
organized communities, though, as in Chinatown for example, leaders recognize
that their preparedness remains inadequate.
A two-year Federal grant funded the initial drafting and implementation of the
Community Hub plan in the two pilot communities, Chinatown and the Bayview.
During 2008, the second year of planning, the city intends to run a pilot program in
these two communities culminating in a drill. The grant expires on December 31,
2008.
Some responsibility for Community Hub planning will belong to the city, for
example, conducting initial outreach throughout the city's communities,
designating city-owned sites and assigning staff, assisting communities in the
maintenance of data by identifying supplies and developing record keeping
protocol, and conducting educational and practice drills involving both city workers
and community representatives. Some responsibility will belong to the
communities. Although each community must first finalize a plan specific to the
needs of its residents and identify its local resources and vulnerabilities, the
community's plans must be consistent with the guidelines provided by the city as to
what it can realistically provide. Once finalized, the community, with city
assistance, must sustain the plan by updating and maintaining data and keeping
designated organizations working together.
Establishing a Hub for community response will be accomplished in stages, first by
the city, then by the city and communities working together, as follows:
Selecting Communities: The city will initiate planning for Community Hubs,
neighborhood by neighborhood, first identifying the city's most vulnerable
communities, i.e. those on unstable ground and with dense populations.
Invitation: The city will issue an invitation to community-based entities to
introduce the Community Hub concept. To secure broad representation within a
community the city must include each unique non-profit, faith-based and
community organizations, schools and interested residents. In addition, each larger
community is made up of smaller neighborhoods, often organized around local
shopping districts. The city will need sources within the community to identify
which community/neighborhood leaders and organizations it should bring to the
table.
Community Planning/Steering Group: Ideally, a community planning group
will grow out of the initial meeting. The community planning group will develop its
own emergency response plan specific to the character of its own community. The
city will facilitate the planning and offer other support and overall management,
but the community must provide the leadership. The city and community steering
group should together develop the ground rules for organizing each Hub, then
finalize the community's plan early with great care paid to encouraging collective
objectivity.
Identification of Vulnerabilities and Strengths Specific to the Local
Community: In order to refine the Community Hub model to meet the needs of
its community the planning group should create an initial list of community
vulnerabilities and strengths. Readiness in local communities varies. Some
communities will have unusual requirements; some already have developed a
community organization; some have trained NERT teams, while others do not.
Potential vulnerabilities could include large numbers of elderly, schools and day
care centers, unreinforced masonry buildings, and/or restricted open space.
Potential strengths could be accessible open space and/or adequate medical
facilities.
Inventory of Resources: The planning group will develop a list of its own
community resources, including facilities, available supplies, local expertise, and
potential volunteers. Representatives from the city possess knowledge of the city's
resources and emergency response strategy.
 believes that if adequate pre-planning and preparation between city government
and communities has taken place, San Francisco can begin to meet the goal of "the
resilient city" where residents and communities accept the inevitability of an "expected"
earthquake and have prepared to respond and sustain themselves and their
communities until help arrives. Despite its limited function,  believes that the
existence of a hub plan in a community can be a valuable tool in embedding emergency
response awareness deeply in the culture of each community, providing a framework for
that community to begin its own plans for local emergency response.  makes the
following observations and recommendations that it believes San Francisco can do to
strengthen the plan and sustain the program.
 recommends that the city take the following actions:
Program Oversight and the Chain of Command:  recognizes that
under the city's Strategic Emergency Response Plan the Department of Emergency
Management (DEM) has responsibility for overseeing and managing emergency
response. DEM should include the Community Hubs in its overall responsibility for
strategic disaster response activities and oversee the management of the program,
including: identify community leaders and organizations; issue invitations to initial
planning sessions; facilitate planning sessions; advise steering groups as to city
resources; assist in sustaining Hubs by providing personnel to help keep records;
and run practice drills and train pre-designated Hub staff.  encourages DEM
to become an active partner with the Department of Public Health (DPH) in
successfully completing the pilot program.
Funding: At the conclusion of the grant period,  believes that DEM should
take the responsibility for obtaining funding to assure that the District Hub plan
becomes an ongoing program. A successful Community Hub program will enable
the city to take advantage of resources that already exist in local communities, so
the city will, in essence, be gaining resources for little outlay.
Locating the District Hubs: DEM should consider the optimum use of each
potential city-run site during emergency response. Initially, DPH was considering
locating the Hubs at health and mental health clinics.  raised concerns that
DPH facilities should be available for emergency medical response. Currently, DEM
and the San Francisco Public Library are discussing locating the hubs at
neighborhood libraries.
 encourages DEM and the libraries to reach an agreement to locate
Community Hubs in the libraries. The twenty-five public libraries are spread
throughout the city. Most have been seismically upgraded. In addition, libraries
have a strong neighborhood identity as information and resource centers.
Staffing Hubs: If the Hubs are located in public libraries, library staff should be
trained to function as Hub staff.
DEM should review the Hub plan for each Community Hub to develop criteria for
staffing, designating command and alternate command, and identifying duties,
responsibilities and the organizational structure for each major response function
within the Hub.
Coordinating with Neighborhood Emergency Response Teams (NERT):
 considers NERT the most reliable tested and proven citizen preparedness
and neighborhood response program and, as such,  believes the city should
consult with local NERT teams in initiating and sustaining Community Hubs.
Publicity:  believes that fostering a culture of preparedness to create a sense
of individual responsibility is essential to community emergency response. To assist
residents to become aware of the resources that will be available in their
community after a disaster, DEM should widely disseminate aspects of the Hub
program, including the location of the Hub site within each community.
Supplying the District Hub: The city should provide a dedicated non-
perishable supply cache, including not only the medical supplies and emergency
supplies necessary to sustain the city's Hub workers, but also the administrative
supplies necessary to maintain records at each Hub.
Inventory of Resources and Record Keeping: The prime responsibility of
each Hub will be to identify available supplies and human resources available for
and needed in emergency response. Record keeping will be essential during
response and for FEMA reimbursement. DEM should assign city staff to help Hubs
maintain records.
Volunteers: DEM should address the advisability of covering the pre-identified
volunteers who will be representing community organizations at the Hubs to
provide the same liability protection as NERT volunteers.
Communications: DEM, with input from the Department of Telecommunication
and Information Services, should develop plans to provide adequate
communication equipment and training.
Security: DEM, with input from the San Francisco Police and Sheriff
Departments, should develop plans to provide security and commitment for police
response.
Vulnerable Populations:  believes that maintaining a comprehensive local
community list of the more vulnerable among us would be an ideal function for a
highly developed Community Disaster Response Hub and could evolve into one of
its prime responsibilities.
Pre-Disaster Coordination Drills and Exercises:  believes that the
only way to achieve effective response leading to timely activation and useful
coordination and communication is through pre-planning, updates, drills and
practice. DEM should staff and facilitate continuing drills and practice of the hub
functions within each District.
['s Emergency Preparedness Task Force has prepared an extensive analysis with
recommendations of the Community Disaster Response Hub Proposal. This report is
available on the  website: www..org]
IMPROVING PUBLIC INFORMATION IN THE NEIGHBORHOODS
Accurate and effective public information can educate a large audience on topics of
public interest. In the last few decades, many public information or social marketing
campaigns have successfully used the techniques of product marketing campaigns.
Examples include the campaigns against drunk driving, against smoking and littering.
The City and County of San Francisco needs an effective public information campaign to
educate its residents on how to prepare for and survive a major earthquake. Without
such information, lives of countless residents and visitors will be put at risk needlessly
and business and economic life will be jeopardized.
Information on how to prepare physically for an earthquake is available to individuals
and businesses. Through its 72hours.org website, San Francisco government has set
forth guidelines for self-preparedness, such as lists of recommended supplies and
procedures for reuniting with family. NGOs have had comparable campaigns, for
example the Red Cross' Prepare  or the Salvation Army's PREP kit. Regional,
state and federal agencies, including the Super Urban Area Security Initiative (SUASI),
the  regional mutual aid agency, have disseminated similar information. The
media, including radio, TV and newspapers, have been strong public information
partners.
Yet, public opinion survey data indicate that less than one-third of the public is prepared
for an emergency. The public has not assimilated nor has it acted upon the basic
information provided to it by public education campaigns. The vast majority is not
adequately prepared to survive independently for at least 72 hours. Many have
inaccurate information on what to do during a violent earthquake. Despite the fact that
the accepted safe behavior during an earthquake is to DUCK, COVER AND HOLD, many
in the public cling to dangerous ideassuch as running out of buildings in the path of
falling objectsor inadequate onessuch as standing in doorways.
Changing behavior across a diverse population requires more than dispensing
information; it requires changing attitudes to create a culture of preparedness. In order
to accomplish this, the city, along with federal, state and private organizations, needs to
study effective social marketing campaigns of the past and to evaluate its current public
information campaigns to develop a more effective way to educate the populace in
preparedness and proper emergency response. In 2007, SUASI provided grant funding
to begin an assessment of public education campaigns. San Francisco needs follow-up
and additional public education projects.
 recommends the City and County of San Francisco:
Solicit joint state, federal and regional agencies and NGOs to sponsor surveys to
evaluate the effectiveness of public information campaigns to encourage emergency
preparedness and educated response.
Use survey results to provide feedback to increase the effectiveness of the public
disaster preparedness campaign.
Use survey results to tailor messages to specific vulnerable segments of the public,
including the elderly, the medically fragile, low-income families, and non-English
speaking residents.
 puts forth below some additional suggestions for programs that it believes could
strengthen the public education campaign: 1) a proposal for a month-by-month disaster
preparedness campaign, 2) suggestions for improving communication by upgrading the
communication structure, in particular signage, the public address system, SFAlert, the
Auxiliary Communication Service, and 3) a recommendation to initiate a warning
system.
A MONTH-BY-MONTH CAMPAIGN ON HOW TO PREPARE FOR A DISASTER
In advertising, constant repetition ensures that the listener hears the message and acts
upon it. Public information on disaster preparedness activities usually floods the
airwaves and fills the newspapers around the commemoration of the 1906 San Francisco
earthquake or following minor earth tremors.
At these times, the media broadcasts information drawn from 72hours.org or other
preparedness sources. Should citizens or businesses wish to avail themselves of the
preparedness checklists, they may feel overwhelmed by the number of items to acquire
and store, plans to prepare, and training to take. Even the most zealous disaster
preparer may be daunted by the task because often the preparedness lists are not
prioritized to highlight the most essential five to ten items. The lists do not reflect the
fact that many apartment residents and homeowners may not have adequate storage
space. Most, as evidenced by surveys, react by inaction. In addition, the constant
turnover of the population means many will miss messages.
A way to provide the public with continuous emergency preparedness and response
information without over-loading them would be to divide the year so that each month
has a recurring theme. To mimic successful product campaigns, the preparedness
campaign needs to operate in the same repetitive manner month by month, year after
year. The calendar of monthly tasks should focus on the key items and plans to foster
resilience and self-reliance and not try to address the laundry list of the "ideal"
preparedness kit and plans. If followed, after a year, an individual, family or employer
would be prepared. For instance, JANUARY and AUGUST could be potable DRINKING
WATER supply purchase and rotation. MARCH and OCTOBER could be emergency
FOOD stock acquisition and rotation. SEPTEMBER could be FAMILY RECONNECT for
preparation and/or updating of a disaster plan.
Media reaches across political and geographic lines to all  communities.
Consequently, any major media campaign would by necessity need to be regional. San
Francisco could initiate the program with the intent of involving counties throughout the
region and seek support from state and federal grants. City and regional government
would have to seek broad involvement of the media, businesses, schools, service,
community and faith-based organizations to get out the word. Then, local disaster
preparedness public information groups would need to cooperate with common,
monthly messages. The monthly program should be coordinated with retailers to ease
purchase of supplies, preferably on sale. Special attention should be paid to the many
segments of San Francisco that do not respond to mainstream media, for example, non-
English speaking residents and the disadvantaged.
 recommends that the City and County of San Francisco
Take the lead, based on survey data, in exploring a month-by-month public
information campaign as the most effective way to educate the public about
emergency preparedness.
NEIGHBORHOOD SIGNAGE 
San Francisco public buildingslibraries, schools, recreation centersand other
locationssocial, community and faith-based facilitiesshould display permanent and
rotating disaster preparedness and response messages. Disaster preparedness
information provided should include guidance on personal and family disaster
preparedness and safety, NERT and Red Cross training courses, the proposed month-
by-month campaign posters, and key preparedness contacts. Updated Community Hub
information should be posted as well.
 recommends that the city:
Implement a neighborhood emergency signage program.
Institute a signage program to complement and support the proposed month-by-
month public information campaign.
OUTDOOR WARNING SYSTEM (NEIGHBORHOOD PUBLIC ADDRESS
SYSTEM)
The city has invested in several public information systems. Every Tuesday at noon, San
Francisco tests its outdoor warning system (once known as air-raid sirens). San
Franciscans can hear the sirens throughout the city, but they are then followed by a
frequently inaudible announcement. Starting in 2005, the City installed 77 outdoor
speakers at a cost of $2.1 million. The system was ineffectual. After the city attorney
threatened litigation, the manufacturer agreed to replace defective parts and to install 45
additional speakers during the next three years. Acoustic experts and city agencies are
studying optimal locations, taking into consideration the communication problems in
San Francisco due to "dead spots" caused by hills and valleys, and attempting to improve
the audible component. Lacking substantial audible improvement, the city needs to
educate its population that when the siren sounds, they should turn to the radio for
current information.
Tokyo tests its citywide loudspeaker warning system daily at 5:00 pm using music
instead of a siren. In a real emergency, the loudspeakers provide information on the
location of safe and unsafe areas.
 recommends that the city:
Hold drills and training on a routine basis to maximize the effectiveness of the
Outdoor Warning System or Siren/Emergency Public Address System.
Educate the public to turn to the emergency band on the radio for updated
emergency instructions once the siren sounds.
ALERTSF
AlertSF is a text-based notification system to alert or warn registered San Franciscans by
sending messages to wireless devices and email accounts on earthquake, chemical spills,
tsunamis, flooding and tornados. Although individuals can register for AlertSF and
receive messages without charge, the system is not widely known or used. (The cost of
receiving text messages depends upon each user's provider contract.)
AlertSF also has the capability to segment information distribution. Registrants have
options for English-language automated information feeds, alerts targeted to specific
areas of the city and/or other  alerting systems. NERTs, for instance, could
receive specific information for a disaster response or even have a "call down" program
to request NERTs to go to particular assignments.
 recommends that the city:
Consider how to promote AlertSF to residents.
Consider how to integrate AlertSF into its emergency preparedness and response
plans.
Explore means for AlertSF to communicate directly to NERT members.
AUXILIARY COMMUNICATION SERVICE (ACS)
In event of failure or overload of the city's normal and emergency communication
systems, ACS (aka Ham radio and other telecommunication equipment operators) will
provide the ultimate backup. ACS will establish and operate primary and secondary
radio networks to carry public safety and emergency communications. ACS FCC licensed
and background checked volunteers would provide critical communication support
between NERT staging areas, Hubs, SFFD battalion stations, EOC and other first
responders. They have the capability to transmit messages to regional and state
government disaster agencies. NERT and ACS jointly drill and have many mutual
volunteers. In fact, once a week ACS volunteers report into a central station to test their
capabilities. As with all the volunteer disaster organizations, they are seeking new
members. ACS is closely affiliated with DEM.
 recommends that
The city's disaster telecommunication plan, equipment acquisition, training and
drills must reflect the ACS volunteer requirements and critical disaster mission.
DEM and ACS should work on an even closer integration of their disaster
responsibilities as well as building on the successful NERT collaboration.
WARNING SYSTEM
Japan has deployed a post-earthquake seismic warning system to warn citizens that an
earthquake has occurred at a distant location and they now have a few seconds to as long
as half a minute before shaking begins in their locale. This provides sufficient time for
people to "DUCK, COVER AND HOLD", for emergency responders to prepare, and for
utilities and transportation agencies to protect their systems.
The warning system works by detecting primary P-waves, which spread from the quake's
epicenter at a faster speed than the destructive shear S-waves. A warning could activate
the public media announcement system/sirens, automatically open firehouse doors, halt
elevators, mass transit and airport operations, stop factory machinery, and initiate safety
measures for medical surgeries. The farther away from the epicenter, the greater the
warning time would be. A few seconds or more of warning may provide life saving and
property damage-mitigating response.
The  presents a complex seismic condition with three major earthquake faults
(Hayward, San Andreas, and Calaveras), making it difficult to differentiate a P-wave
source and thus decreasing potential warning time. Any system in the  would
probably just have a single mode of warning that there is a big earthquake somewhere in
the .
Funded by the United States Geological Service (USGS), seismologists at the University
at California, Berkeley, collaborating with Caltech, the Southern California Earthquake
Center (SCEC at USC) and the USGS, are working on a California system, inspired in
part by Japan's warning system. They are currently two years into a three-year testing
project.
For testing purposes, the seismologists have several algorithms running on the real time
seismic system in the state. ElarmS is the algorithm developed at UC Berkeley that
successfully detected the October M5.4 Alum Rock earthquake near San Jose and
provided accurate information about its intensity and direction. It is running statewide
using approximately 180 stations. They are hoping to add the remaining stations within
the next month or two bringing the total to over 300. On this system, they are able to
assess the timeliness and accuracy of warnings. The Onsite method (developed at
Caltech), a single station approach with higher speed and lower accuracy, is aimed at
providing warnings even at the epicenter of large earthquakes. It is already running in
Southern California and the algorithms are currently being installed in Northern
California. The goal of the three-year project, to be completed in the summer of 2009, is
to assess the accuracy and timeliness of these early warning systems should they proceed
to full implementation. While the testing is ongoing, there has already been success in
detecting earthquakes and providing predictions of forthcoming ground shaking.
Researchers are starting to look to the next stage of the early warning project, how
would/should the system be implemented.
Researchers believe the California system is five years away from being fully
implemented, because the $50-$100 million cost needs to be funded. After testing of
optimal station spacing and accuracy of warnings, they have concluded that 350 existing
seismometers would need upgrading and 600 new seismometers would need to be
added. Japan's system uses 1000 instruments. Sadly, the President's FY09 budget
almost cut the funding for external support within the earthquake program at the USGS
in half. If this cut occurs, there is no possibility for the USGS to continue the early
warning project beyond the current three-year project, so we need to be vigilant to keep
funds in the budget. Other regions of the United States have federal systems to provide
severe weather warnings including tornadoes, hurricanes, floods and winter storms. It is
time earthquake prone states have an early warning system to safeguard infrastructure
networks and protect life, as well.  believes that further testing of an earthquake
warning system in California is essential to secure property and preserve life.
 recommends that the City and County of San Francisco
Lobby California's congressional delegation and state government to support
further funding of the California Seismic Network Project by the USGS to develop
and deploy an earthquake identification and warning system.
In particular, Congresswoman Jackie Speier has indicated that she will explore funding
for development and deployment of the post-earthquake warning system.  has sent
Congresswoman Speier a letter of support.
 recommends that its membership
Support Congresswoman Speier's initiative to develop and install a post-seismic
early warning system by seeking its approval through California's congressional
delegation, state and local governments.
SUPPORTING COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS WORKING WITH
NEIGHBORHOODS FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
During the two most recent  disastersthe Oakland Wildfire and the Loma
Prieta earthquakemany non-profit service agencies, faith-based organizations and
disaster relief non-governmental organizations (NGOs) assisted their communities,
supplementing government first responder and disaster response efforts. Unfortunately,
their ability to galvanize their resources to respond successfully to these small-scale
disasters does not prove they could perform during a large-scale disaster, such as an
earthquake on one of the 's faults. Of course, complacency is not exclusive to
non-governmental organizations. To counteract a false sense of safety and foster the
culture of preparedness, San Francisco city government and non-governmental
organizations have begun to collaborate to augment traditional emergency preparedness
and response with community self-reliance.
SAN FRANCISCO CITY ENTITIES SUPPORTING COMMUNITY PREPAREDNESS
In addition to NERT and the incipient Community Disaster Response Hubs, discussed
elsewhere in the paper, other San Francisco city-sponsored government entities interact
at the neighborhood level to support disaster response. Among these are:
SAN FRANCISCO'S CITIZEN CORPS COUNCIL
The Citizen Corps Council brings together representatives from the non-profit, faith
based, private and government sectors to coordinate outreach and volunteer efforts
related to citizen preparedness. Participants include , the Red Cross, Salvation
Army, Macy's West, First Republic Bank, San Francisco State University, SF SAFE
(Safety Awareness for Everyone), SF NERT, San Francisco Police Department, Mayor's
Office of Neighborhood Services, SF Ready, Department of Public Health, The Volunteer
Center, the University of San Francisco, San Francisco 211/Helplink, SFCARD
(Community Agencies Responding to Disaster), City College of San Francisco, Fritz
Institute, and many others.
NEIGHBORHOOD EMPOWERMENT NETWORK (NEN)
NEN is a strategic partnership of city agencies, local non-profits and committed
community leaders. NEN is a collaborative platform that serves as a central engagement
point for communities to find and share information that will empower them to make
their neighborhoods a better place to live. One of its long-range goals is planning and
preparedness for disaster.
Basic to NEN's mission is its belief that once people become involved in their community
on a regular basis, they will self-initiate community activities. At the same time, NEN
has found that the residents who are individually prepared through 72hours.org, NERT
training or other programs are often also engaged with some local community
organization. NEN wishes to build upon this base of prepared, community-involved
residents by streamlining access to information and continuing education to strengthen
community preparedness and planning. NEN hopes to advance the mission of
preparedness beyond the first 72 hrs after the earthquake and well into the complete
recovery of the city.
NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS ACTIVE IN COMMUNITY DISASTER
PREPAREDNESS
Several non-governmental organizations operate to strengthen neighborhood response
to disaster by assisting non-profit service agencies, neighborhood associations and local
business. Their activities range from assistance in planning and preparedness to actual
disaster response. The success of their efforts will be critical to minimizing death,
injuries and destruction as well as improving recovery where San Franciscans live and
work.
The significance of the involvement in disaster response by non-governmental agencies,
including faith-based organizations, cannot be overstated. They are spread
geographically across the city, and many are located within city communities with
vulnerable populations. Although their missions vary, most are oriented toward
assistance to San Franciscans in their daily lives. Often these are the very organizations
that support populations mass media will not reach: the homeless, non-English speaking
residents, the frail or the mentally impaired. If prepared to do so, these organizations 
like food banks, immigrant rights organizations, crisis centers, and churchescould
reach these populations in case of a disaster.
Non-governmental organizations exclusively devoted to disaster preparedness, include
SF Community Agencies Responding to Disaster (SFCARD), SF Coordinated Assistance
Network (SF CAN), and Fritz Institute. Other non-governmental organizations include
neighborhood disaster response in their broader missions and programs. Some of these
organizations include  Red Cross and the San Francisco Interfaith Council.
A brief description of the activities of key organizations follows.
SF COMMUNITY AGENCIES RESPONDING TO DISASTER (SFCARD)
SFCARD provides disaster preparedness training to individual community and faith
based organizations to enable each organization to continue to serve the recipients of its
services after a major disaster. SFCARD also organizes and coordinates workshops to
bring these community and faith-based organizations together to begin cooperative
disaster preparation and planning. Their most recent workshop brought together
members of the faith-based community as part of their Inter-Congregational Emergency
Preparedness Pilot. Membership on the Executive Committee of SFCARD demonstrates
the organization's reach into the non-profit community. Members include the San
Francisco Food Bank, Glide Church, American Red Cross  Chapter, San
Francisco HELPLINK/211, Jewish Community Relations Council, The Salvation Army,
the Junior League, San Francisco Interfaith Council, and The Volunteer Center.
SF COORDINATED ASSISTANCE NETWORK (CAN)
SF CAN is a collaborative group of nonprofit and faith-based agencies working together
to strengthen San Francisco's disaster response and recovery systems. Its primary
purpose is to coordinate and utilize a shared client and resource information database
that shares client data among members to enhance services to clients after a disaster. In
addition, the collaboration works to create joint response and recovery plans to integrate
these into the city's overall response plan and enhance existing community collaboration
efforts. The core agencies involved in CAN include the American Red Cross ,
The Salvation Army, United Way of the , San Francisco HELPLINK/211, The
Volunteer Center, Catholic Charities CYO, SFCARD, San Francisco's Department of
Emergency Management and Department of Human Services.
FRITZ INSTITUTE
Fritz Institute works with government and non-governmental entities to make disaster
relief more effective. About a year ago, the Institute began a multi-year program, the Bay
Area Preparedness Initiative, bringing together local government, corporate, nonprofit
and philanthropic leaders in the San Francisco  in a joint effort to identify gaps
in disaster preparedness. The initiative developed ways to measure and improve
preparedness and response capacity in the region, beginning with local community and
faith-based organizations. The intent is to strengthen the organizations' disaster
resilience to deliver critical disaster services to their at-risk and vulnerable populations.
In Fall 2007, 12 major service agencies agreed to participate in the Disaster Resilient
Organization: Glide Church, St. Anthony Foundation, Catholic Charities, Mission
Neighborhood Health Center, San Francisco Food Bank, Project Open Hand, Jewish
Community Center, Episcopal Community Services, Lutheran Social Services, NICOS
Chinese Health Coalition, Meals on Wheels, and Jewish Family and Children's Services.
The Institute helps each organization define their preparedness criteria and disaster
mission, develop a disaster operation plan, and facilitate staff trainings with assistance
from the American Red Cross  chapter, City Department of Emergency
Management and SFCARD.
As part of the initiative, each organization will develop a disaster service focus. For
example, the Mission Neighborhood Health Center will focus its disaster mission on
triage and medical care. St Anthony Foundation will focus on continuing its mass-
feeding program. Upon the successful completion of the San Francisco efforts, the Fritz
Institute plans to expand this initiative to the greater .
 RED CROSS
San Franciscans can choose to be prepared for an earthquake through the Red Cross'
Prepare  (PBA), an initiative to guide at least one million  residents to
get ready for a disaster. PBA offers disaster information materials, preparedness
presentations, and first aid training to individuals, neighborhood groups, businesses,
faith-based organizations, government agencies and non-profits organizations. Online
tools on the organizations website instruct on how to "Make a Plan, Get a Disaster Kit,
and Get Trained."
Volunteers carry out 99 percent of the Red Cross's Disaster Services, providing shelters,
mass care, logistics and related services. In addition, the Disaster Action Team and other
volunteers respond to local and national disasters such as fires, hurricanes and floods
providing "real life" response training. Unfortunately, the Red Cross as well as other
NGO first responders do not have enough local volunteers to care for the estimated tens
of thousands of people displaced persons after a major earthquake strikes the .
SAN FRANCISCO INTERFAITH COUNCIL (SFIC)
Disaster planners recognize that faith-based organizations will be an essential resource
in disaster response. Places of worship exist in all neighborhoods; they will be the
locations where neighbors converge following a quake. Congregations need to be
prepared to take care of their own needs and to provide relief to survivors. Faith-based
organizations can further disaster preparedness by making their congregations aware of
programs and individual preparedness guidelines. In addition, they can encourage
congregants to train in programs such as NERT and the Red Cross, which could multiply
the number of self-reliant San Franciscans prepared to activate and respond in a
disaster.
The San Francisco Interfaith Council has facilitated a coalition of faith congregations in
disaster planning and preparedness. The council was an early financial supporter of
SFCARD. In May 2008, the coalition assembled nearly 100 faith-based communities for
a conference focused on their challenges and potential roles in the event of a disaster.
One goal of the coalition is to form clusters so neighborhood congregations can plan
together, assess area emergency assets, and share resources. These clusters could be
important participants in the proposed Community Disaster Response Hubs program.
To strengthen collaborative planning and preparedness between the city
and non-governmental organizations in order to assist communities in
planning for and executing disaster response
 recommends the following.
 recognizes that SFCARD needs additional funds to staff its programs. 
encourages the Interfaith Council and the Red Cross to continue their financial
support of SFCARD's work providing training and resources to community and
faith-based organizations so they can continue to serve their clients post-disaster.
In addition, SFCARD's work in bringing organizations together to work
collaboratively is essential to community disaster response.  urges and
encourages other foundations and public and private organizations to lend their
support.
SF CAN administers a shared client and resource information database. 
urges the city to include SF CAN in its annual disaster drills to test and practice the
efficacy of the database.  urges SF CAN's member organizations to drill, at
least annually, using the shared client database to strengthen their collaboration
agreements.
 urges Fritz Institute and all cooperating organizations to develop and
implement a plan to ensure of the Disaster Resilient Organization initiative.
 urges the city to increase its support training, material and leadership of
faith- based communities so they can become one of San Francisco's most effective
disaster preparedness, response and recovery resources. Linkage with the
Community Disaster Hubs can help to coordinate, support and mobilize these
communities.
DISASTER PREPAREDNESS TASK FORCE  NEXT STEPS
The Task Force intends to research, analyze and prepare reports on the
following topics:
1. emergency medical response planning for mass casualties;
2. emergency planning and preparedness for mass care and shelter;
3. the Department of Emergency Management's All Hazards Strategic Plan and other
departmental Emergency Operation Plans and how they relate to regional and state
disaster planning.
APPENDIX I:
STEPS YOU CAN TAKE TO IMPROVE YOUR CHANCES OF SURVIVAL. THE CHOICE
IS YOURS. ARE YOU PREPARED?
 
Everyone must assume personal responsibility to be prepared. Your life could
change radically following the inevitable next earthquake. Consider 
Where will your family be? Do you have a family disaster plan? Do you update it
annually and keep your family members informed?
Will you have medical services? 911 emergency system and hospitals and trauma
centers may be physically damaged and will be undoubtedly overwhelmed. Do you
have needed prescription drugs, first aid supplies at home, in your car and work?
Are you trained to provide emergency medical assistance?
Will you be able to get home? Road damage and closures, and public transportation
and airports will experience interruptions in service. Do you have alternate plans to
travel home or stay at work for several hours or days? If you cannot get home who
will care for your family members?
Will you be able to stay in your home? Your home may be damaged and unsafe and
your personal necessities may be inaccessible. Do you have a disaster "go-kit"
containing water, food, first aid supplies, flashlight, radio, poncho, space blanket,
and warm clothes? Do you have sufficient supplies for your family to sustain them
for at least one week? Do you have a "shelter-in-place" kit including plastic
sheeting, hammer, nails and other materials for repairing your home or workplace
to live in following a property-damaging quake?
Can you live without services upon which you rely? Drinking water will be in very
short supply. Gas and electricity may be out for days or weeks. Telecommunications
will be overloaded or unavailable. Waste treatment facilities could be out of
commission. Gas will be in short supply and possibly, rationed. Bank operations
may be disrupted. Grocery, drug and other retail stores may be closed or unable to
restock shelves for an extended period.
How will your job be affected? Business may sustain damage to buildings and
disruptions of operations. Employersprivate, public, and non-profitneed to develop
and implement business continuity and recovery plans. The plan should be updated and
tested annually. Without a recovery plan, many small businesses are likely to fail.
Employers and their employees need to prepare work place disaster plans, including
disaster supplies to sustain and shelter workers in-place for days.
APPENDIX 2:
DISASTER PREPAREDNESS RESOURCES
 
72hours.org/San Francisco Department of Emergency Management's excellent
website providing thorough information on a wide range of disaster preparedness
and response issues: www.72hours.org
Neighborhood Emergency Response Team (NERT) provides free training on how to
prepare for a disaster at home, car and work as well as hands on skill development
in light search and rescue, fire suppression, disaster first aid, and utility shutoff.
http://www.sfgov.org/site/sfnert_index.asp
ACS/Auxiliary Communication Service are volunteer radio operators providing
communication during a disaster: www.sfacs.net
AlertSF Register is the place to register your email address and/or text enabled
device (cell phone, pager, computer, etc) for text alerts from the City and County of
San Francisco about potential hazards and/or post-disaster information:
www.alertsf.org
Association of  Governments has earthquake shake maps and disaster
preparedness information
The  Red Cross Chapter provides disaster preparedness and response
information including first aid training courses and ways to become actively
involved such as Disaster Action Team and training for shelter operations:
http://www.bayarea-redcross.org/ and www.preparebayarea.org or 1-877
PREPBAY
Building Owners and Managers Association of San Francisco has a Disaster
Preparedness and Emergency Resource Links button on its homepage:
www.bomasf.org
Business Recovery Managers Association Business (BRMA) provides business
disaster recovery guidance: www.brma.com
Emergency Digital Information Service (EDIS) is a state service for residents in any
county to sign up for alerts via email or wireless devices: www.edis.ca.gov
Federal Emergency Management Agency provides information and help after a
disaster: http://www.fema.gov/assistance/process/guide.shtm
Prepare Now has emergency preparedness information for vulnerable populations:
www.preparenow.org
SFCARD/San Francisco Community Agencies Responding to Disasters provides
training for human services agencies and assistance in the development of agency
emergency plans. 415-955-8946 or www.sfcard.org
United States Geological Service (USGS) developed, with numerous disaster
organizations, an outstanding publication, "Putting Down Roots in Earthquake
Country: Your Handbook for the San Francisco Bay Region". It is a comprehensive
guide for preparing and responding to life in "Earthquake Country". It may be
ordered from the USGS: http://earthquake.usgs/regional/nca/prepare
APPENDIX 3:
EMERGENCY PLANNING EFFORTS AT FISHERMAN'S WHARF
The Fisherman's Wharf Community Benefit District sponsors a committee called
PIERsafe (Partners in Emergency Response), which meets regularly to develop
emergency plans, conduct disaster exercises and train as many people as possible within
the area.
PIERsafe includes representatives of the hotels, restaurants, ferry and boat operators,
tourist attractions, retail stores and other businesses at Fisherman's Wharf. The
National Park Service, San Francisco Police and Fire Departments and other public
sector partners are active participants.
PIERsafe's goals include the following: updating the community's emergency plan,
recruiting new members to become NERT trained, conducting an earthquake exercise in
the fall of 2008, increasing the involvement from the community in the PIERsafe
program, and continuing to publish a quarterly PIERsafe newsletter with preparedness
information and safety tips for the Fisherman's Wharf Community.
In 2008, NERT training was conducted at Fisherman's Wharf in April, a Red Cross first
aid course was offered in June, and the annual earthquake exercise will be held in
October. PIERsafe planning meetings are held each month at Fisherman's Wharf.
PIERsafe can be found online at
http://visitfishermanswharf.com/aboutus/latestupdates.aspx The Fisherman's Wharf
PIERsafe is an example that other business associations, large buildings and
business/employer groups could emulate. Participation by businesses in the emerging
Community Disaster Response Hubs brings valuable resources and insights that will
further San Francisco's preparedness and response. There are cases where a business
district (ie. Union Square, Financial) could become a hub serving employers, employees,
visitors and residents in the area.
APPENDIX 4:
LESSONS LEARNED
LESSONS LEARNED: JAPAN
Despite well-laid plans, Japan learned painful lessons from the 1995 magnitude-7.2
earthquake, which devastated Kobe and killed 6,433 people. The badly botched
emergency response and relief effort was Japan's version of Hurricane Katrina, leading
to public outrage and a seriously weakened national government. As a result, Japan
revamped its disaster response systems, emphasizing a preventative program of seismic
retrofitting, building code upgrades, seismic warning technology, hazard/risk maps,
adoption of California's Incident Command System, and communications and
coordination strategies. Japan budgets $22 billion dollars annually for "disaster
management", funding divisions to detect and minimize damage.
Japan, approximately the same geographic size and latitude as California, has a
population of 127 millionover three times that of California's 38 million people. Yet,
Japan has successfully institutionalized a national disaster drill, on National Disaster
Prevention Day, held each year to mark the 1923 Kanto earthquake that flattened Tokyo
and caused 100,000 deaths. Reinforcing national awareness, one million people
participate in the disaster preparedness drills, evacuation drills, table-top exercises,
search/ rescue, self-help, and mutual assistance systems. Similarly, during the year,
education, tests and drills focus on a myriad of disaster scenarios throughout the
country. Drills are mandatory and department stores carry earthquake preparedness
kits. Starting early in life, school education, coupled with self/family/community
education, fosters a "culture of disaster preparedness."
"To lead an untrained people to war is to throw them away."
 Confucius
LESSONS LEARNED: CUBA
During a hurricane alert in Cuba, a foreigner wrote admirably about the large number of
Cubans who safeguarded tourists, constantly advising them of emergency procedures.
Like village elders in the Indonesian islands who moved people to high ground when the
ocean receded, prior to the massive 2004 Asian Tsunami, many seeds of leadership and
knowledge need to be planted throughout the society. With proper nurturing, these
seeds trigger a ripple effect of self-sustaining emergency awareness and responsibility.
"In 2004, Oxfam International, a nongovernmental organization that helps
developing nations recover from disaster, released a report about the Cuban
model of Community-Based Disaster Management. Unlike the United States,
where disaster relief means externally supporting disaster victims and throwing
large amounts of resources in a one-size-fits-all method after disaster strikes,
Cuba focuses on localized disaster-preparedness systems and tailored,
specialized relief based on prior community organization. For instance, adequate
shelters and supplies are available in every community. People know where these
are before hand and know what to do. Everybody has a prearranged role. Also,
nongovernmental people serve as leaders."
San Francisco Chronicle, November 9, 2005
Before the 2004 Hurricane Ivan's 160 mph winds hit Cuba, the government evacuated 2
million people. As a result: not a single death or serious injury. The "Oxfam" Study
noted: "The single most important thing about disaster response in Cuba is that people
cooperate en masse". Also, "The Cuban population clearly has developed a culture of
safety'." People at all levels of government and society, including children, embrace roles
in reducing risks and saving lives. Preparedness begins in grade school, continuing
through higher education, the workplace and adult education at the community level.
Healthcare professionals have routine disaster-response training. Over 95 percent of the
population has been trained in a four-step framework: information, alert, alarm and
recovery.
Under a 1976 law, every adult has civil defense training. Also, local and provincial
officials serve as the civil defense officials, providing continuity of recognized leadership
with intimate knowledge of their region. Cuban emergency preparedness focuses on
citizen education, community risk mapping, annually updated emergency plans,
simulation drills and local leadershipthrough investment in social capital.
Community-Based Disaster Management enables communities to mesh with other
residents, local employers and indigenous community-based organizations, forging a
social foundation for disaster preparedness.
LESSONS LEARNED: MAURITIUS
Mauritius, a small Indian Ocean island, resides in weather zone that meteorologists call
a "cyclone factory". This poor, non-industrial society has a sophisticated disaster
preparedness program, which rich, technologically-advanced nations can, but have yet
to, emulate. Mauritius' islanders have evolved towards a sophisticated system of
precautionswith a network of cyclone shelters, education, regular drills, early warning
systems and mandatory closings of businesses and schools prior to threatening storms.
The monstrous 2007 Cyclone Gamede, which set global meteorological records for
rainfall, caused only two deaths on the island.
"I happened to be in Mauritius when Hurricane Katrina struck, I still remember
the open-mouthed disbelief with which people there watched the unfolding of
the events in Louisiana. Mauritius is a country that has learned, through trial
and experience, that early warnings are not enoughpreparation also demands
public education and political will. In an age when extreme weather events are
clearly increasing in frequency, the world would do well to learn from it."
Amitav Ghosh, Op-Ed Contributor, New York Times, May 10, 2008
LESSONS LEARNED: BERKELEY
Bolstered by strong political leadership, particularly a single Council member, in the
1980s and reinforced by the Loma Prieta Earthquake in 1989 and the East Bay hills
firestorm in 1991, the City of Berkeley has been a local pioneer in mitigation measures
and community-based disaster preparedness. Berkeley citizens have been willing to tax
themselves "to protect their way of life". Bond measures of $362 million have enabled a
sustained program of seismic safety and mitigation, retrofitting public buildings and
constructing above-ground water systems. A majority of private homes have been
seismically retrofitted, facilitated through a subsidy system that provides a rebate of 0.5
percent of the total price of a newly purchased house.
"The city of Berkeley, California, has piloted seismic and fire safety efforts in all
sectors of the community. The municipal government, the local school district,
and the University of California, Berkeley, campus have instituted mitigation
policies and safety programs that collectively have reduced community risk.
Using innovative political, financial, and legislative approaches, Berkeley is
systematically reconstructing or eliminating its most hazardous buildings. Much
of this progress can be attributed to an atmosphere in which leaders take
responsibility for reducing risk"."
American Society of Civil Engineers, 2002
Berkeley's "Community Disaster Supply Program" fosters neighborhood self-help and
leadership. To qualify for free pre-positioned 6'x6'x6' caches of emergency supplies, a
competition process identifies motivated neighborhood groups, who are city-trained,
organized and willing to commit to a "Letter of Understanding" for specified
responsibilities in disaster preparedness and response. The Office of Emergency Services
promoted the "You're On Your Own!" message with flyers and "Are You Ready?" door
hangersattracting community volunteers to Community Emergency Response
Training (CERT) classes. 
Authors: Jim Aldrich, Bob Bennett, Shelley Carroll, Ray Favetti, Julia Hansen, Dick
Morten, Bob Pelelnicky, Alec Tune and Howard Wong
 
 
 
 
<DRAFT/VERSION: DATE> 
 
 
THE HUB CONCEPT: 
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A 
COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
Additional report descriptor if appropriate to be styled in heading 4  + change to 11pt. 
Nulla blandit vulputate odio ex vulputate tation dolore suscipit. 
 
 
 
 REPORT 
Adopted by the  Board of Directors  
Juee 18, 2008 
 
Released 
October 16, 2008 
The authors of this report were Julia Hansen, Shelley Carroll, Jim Aldrich 
 
www..org 
 
 
 
 
 
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
 believes that San Francisco can be a resilient city whose residents accept as 
inevitable an earthquake of significant magnitude and are prepared to respond and 
sustain themselves and their communities until help arrives. Preparation for such a 
comprehensive emergency response must engage each individual, each community 
and the myriad of organizations that make up these communities. 
The Department of Public Health for the city of San Francisco obtained a federal 
grant funding a proposal to create Community Disaster Response Hubs or field-
based disaster coordination centers throughout San Francisco. The Hubs can 
provide the infrastructure for community response to major emergencies. By 
identifying local resources, developing a plan to integrate and coordinate those 
resources with each other and with the city, and practicing communication through 
their Hubs, communities can develop an effective response.  
  
 
 
 
2    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
SUMMARY OF  RECOMMENDATIONS 
 encourages the adoption of the proposed Community Disaster Response Hub plan and 
makes the following observations and recommendations that it believes the city of San Francisco 
can do to strengthen the plan and sustain the program.  
 
Program Oversight and the Chain of Command: The grant funding the initial Community Disaster 
Response Hub plan and two pilot programs in Chinatown and the Bay View expires on December 31, 
2008.  recognizes that under the citys Strategic Emergency Response Plan the Department of 
Emergency Management (DEM) has responsibility for overseeing and managing emergency response. 
 encourages DEMs active partnership with the Department of Public (DPH) to complete 
successfully the pilot program, develop a final framework for the Hub concept, and draft 
orientation/training guidelines to establish and maintain Hubs. If the San Francisco Public Libraries are 
designated as the Hub sites, as has been proposed, the Libraries should participate in the early planning 
stages. 
DEM should include the Community Disaster Response Hubs in its overall responsibility for disaster 
strategic response activities and oversee the management of the program, including: identify leaders and 
organizations in each community, issue invitations to initial planning sessions, facilitate planning 
sessions, advise Hub steering groups as to city resources, assist in sustaining programs by providing 
personnel to help keep records, and run practice drills and staff-activated Hubs. 
 
Funding: At the conclusion of the grant period,  believes that DEM should take the responsibility 
for obtaining funding to assure that the Hub plan becomes an ongoing program. A successful Hub 
program will enable the city to take advantage of resources that already exist in local communities, so the 
city will, in essence, be gaining resources for little outlay. 
 
Staffing Hubs: DEM should review each designated Hub plan to determine which department or 
departments should staff the Hub; DEM should then develop criteria for staffing, designating command 
and alternate command, and identify duties, responsibilities and the organizational structure for each 
major response function within the Hub. If libraries are to be designated as the Hub sites, library 
personnel must be trained to act as Hub personnel in the event of a disaster. 
 
Locating the Hubs: If libraries are not selected as the Hub site, DEM should consider the optimum use of 
each other potential city-run site during emergency response, and then confer with communities when 
selecting the optimum sites for the Hubs. 
 
Coordinating with Community Emergency Response Teams (NERT):  considers NERT the 
most reliable tested and proven citizen preparedness and neighborhood response program and, as such, 
 believes the city should consult with local NERT teams in initiating and sustaining Hubs. 
 
Publicity:  believes that fostering a culture of preparedness to create a sense of individual 
responsibility is essential to community emergency response. To assist residents to become aware of the 
resources that will be available in their community after a disaster, DEM should widely disseminate 
aspects of the Hub program, including the location of the Hub site within each community.  
3    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
 
Supplying the Hub: The city should provide a dedicated non-perishable supply cache, including not only 
emergency supplies necessary to sustain the citys Hub workers, but also the administrative supplies 
necessary to maintain records at each Hub. DPH is already staging medical supplies at community 
facilities and  believes that providing supplies to Hubs should be included in overall planning.  
 
Inventory of Resources and Record Keeping: The prime responsibility of each Hub will be to identify 
available supplies and human resources available for and needed in emergency response. Record keeping 
will be essential during response and for FEMA reimbursement. DEM should assign city staff to help 
Hubs maintain records.  
 
Volunteers: DEM should address the advisability of covering the pre-identified volunteers who will be 
representing community organizations at the Hubs to provide the same liability protection as NERT 
volunteers.  
 
Communications: DEM, with input from the Department of Telecommunication and Information 
Services, should develop plans to provide adequate communication equipment and training.  
 
Security: DEM, with input from the San Francisco Police Department, should develop plans to provide 
security and commitment for police response. 
 
Vulnerable Populations:  believes that maintaining a comprehensive local community list of the 
more vulnerable among us would be an ideal function for a highly developed Community Disaster 
Response Hub and could evolve into one of its prime responsibilities.  
 
Pre-Disaster Coordination Drills and Exercises:  believes that the only way to achieve effective 
response leading to timely activation and useful coordination and communication is through pre-planning, 
updates, drills and practice. DEM should staff and facilitate continuing drills and practice of the hub 
functions at each Hub. 
 
INTRODUCTION:                                                                       
COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE HUB PROPOSAL  
Emergency planners in San Francisco recognize the responsibility of government to meet the needs of the 
residents where they live and work after an expected1 damaging earthquake occurs. Yet, in the 
immediate aftermath of an expected earthquake, government responders will be overwhelmed; the impact 
                                                        
1 For purposes of this paper, a damaging earthquake or expected earthquake is defined as a 7.2 quake occurring on 
the Peninsula section of the San Andreas Fault. At this time, specific policy guidelines for existing buildings and 
emergency procedures are designed for the expected earthquake. 
 
4    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
of the earthquake will interrupt many regular services from transportation to utilities to medical care to 
the availability of food and shelter. As a result, government recognizes that communities and individuals 
will be on their own for some time and it must plan accordingly.  
Residents must recognize, as well, that an effective plan for comprehensive emergency response engages 
each individual, each community and the myriad of organizations that make up these communities. Along 
with individual and community self-sufficiency, effective emergency response will require extraordinary 
cooperation not only within communities but also between communities and the city. Emergency planners 
must help create awareness of this eventuality, assist communities to prepare, and integrate community 
resources with the citys emergency response resources.  
The citys Department of Emergency Management, the Department of Public Health, first responders and 
representatives from community organizations have developed a draft proposal to create field-based 
disaster coordination centers or Hubs2 throughout the city. Initially, the hubs, termed Community Disaster 
Response Hubs (Hubs), were to be located at DPH facilities within San Franciscos 10 Emergency 
Districts; currently, the city is considering basing the Hubs in the twenty-five library sites located 
throughout the city. 
The function of Community Disaster Response Hubs is limited. Hubs will act as the city governments 
portal within each specific affected community, not as service centers or command centers, but as 
communication centers to facilitate the exchange of information between the EOC and the local 
community regarding available and needed resources and available and needed services. The Hub will 
have two primary functions:  
 
1. Information Coordination  to collect and disseminate disaster information between 
community entities about who is responding and what that response involves and, then, to 
serve as an information conduit between the citys Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and 
the community entities. 
2. Resource Coordination  to identify and assess available resources and shortfalls and, where 
shortfalls exist, to communicate those needs to the EOC to facilitate resource deployment to 
the appropriate community site. 
Hubs activate immediately after the emergency event. At the same time, the citys Emergency Operations 
Center (EOC) will activate its own Community Branch section to be a liaison with the Hubs. The Hubs 
will operate in the communities as field-based extensions of the EOC. They will be city-run entities, 
staffed by employees of the City and County of San Francisco.3  
 believes that if adequate pre-planning and preparation between city government and communities 
has taken place, San Francisco can begin to meet the goal of the resilient city where residents and 
communities accept the inevitability of an expected earthquake and have prepared to respond and 
sustain themselves and their communities until help arrives. Despite its limited function,  believes 
                                                        
2 The hub concept is a popular form of administration in a variety of circumstances and is particularly useful in 
administering emergency response. In case of a major disaster in San Francisco, a variety of organizations and 
public entities will rely on the hub model to direct response activities. For example, the Red Cross will use the hub 
system to coordinate shelter and other services; the Department of Public Health will use a similar model to direct 
medical care. All references to hubs here are to Community Disaster Response Hubs activated by the City and 
County of San Francisco as a conduit between City government and the communities. 
3 Upon a declared emergency all employees of the City and County of San Francisco shall be designated Disaster 
Service Workers and may be directed to posts throughout the City based on need.  
5    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
that the existence of a hub plan in a community can be a valuable tool in embedding emergency response 
awareness deeply in the culture of each community, providing a framework for that community to begin 
its own plans for local emergency response.  
The Hub will not replace any emergency operation in the Strategic Plan; rather it will be an add-on, 
taking advantage of resources that already exist in local communities and radiating out into each 
community to help match identified needs with city resources, including field clinics, shelter and feeding 
sites, and staging areas for bulk supplies. Ironically, although the city will initiate the Community 
Disaster Response Hub program and the city will facilitate its planning and assist in sustaining it, the 
leadership and commitment to maintain and sustain the program must come from local communities or 
the program will fail. Success depends upon active community involvement and continued commitment 
by the city of San Francisco.  
 
CITY GOVERNMENT:  
San Francisco engages in comprehensive planning to prepare response to and recovery from an 
earthquake. The citys Strategic Plan provides for the city to engage all its public entities to restore 
lifelines, manage structural assessment, and supply mass care, including shelter, food and emergency 
medicine. The citys command structure will be an Incident Command System (ICS) following the 
National Incident Command System (NIMS). In the event of a major disaster, Departmental Operation 
Command Centers (DOCs) and the Emergency Operation Center (EOC) will activate immediately. 
Participants in the EOC will include representatives from all departments with a major disaster response 
role and will become the focal point for coordinated command and control of citywide response efforts. 
The EOC operates as a multi-agency, multi-department coordinated command, providing support and 
communication to control citywide response efforts.  
COMMUNITIES:  
At the same time, a variety of non-governmental organizations, including local businesses, faith-based 
organizations, community associations and medical facilities, make up local communities throughout the 
city. Many of these organizations have considerable resources at their command, including expertise, able 
personnel and volunteers. The strength and variety of these groups and their resources vary from 
community to community. The extent to which organizations and leaders within local communities in San 
Francisco have identified these resources and developed a coordinated local response plan also varies. 
Specific entities from faith-based organizations to businesses to non-profits have developed their own 
internal earthquake plans. Other groups, such as SFCARD4, CAN5 and NEN6, along with some 
community associations, have taken initial steps to coordinate the activities of prepared individuals and 
prepared entities with each other and with the city. Even in the most organized communities, though, as in 
Chinatown for example, leaders recognize that their preparedness remains inadequate. 
                                                        
4 SFCARD (Community Agencies Responding to Disaster) (http://www.sfcard.org/ ) works with human service 
agencies serving in San Francisco to ensure business continuity after a disaster. SFCARD assists agencies providing 
extensive disaster preparedness training, including on-site agency visits. It has undertaken a variety of coordination 
initiatives to support the capacity of local agencies and the vulnerable populations that they serve.  
5 CAN, SF Coordinated Assistance Network, is a collaborative group of nonprofit and faith-based agencies working 
together to utilize a shared client and resource information database to enhance services to clients after a disaster. 
6 NEN, Neighborhood Empowerment Network hopes to facilitate the capacity of neighborhoods to collaborate with 
government and non-government organizations to improve the quality of life of their residents. Initially, the program 
will involve community leaders in fairs and workshops to expand knowledge about available resources and methods 
for community organization. 
6    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
 
In examining the Community Disaster Response Hub concept,  has looked to the success of 
programs to organize local response in other jurisdictions, both national and international. Japan, 
geologically unstable, has a long tradition of emergency response but its experience in the Kobe 
earthquake of 1995 revealed the weaknesses in individual and community preparedness.7 Since 1995, 
Japan has embarked upon an extensive emergency response program to strengthen the resilience of local 
communities through an organizational plan based on the hub model, albeit more extensive than the Hub 
plan discussed herein. In this country, Washington State8 has embarked upon an ambitious emergency 
response program promulgated by an interactive website that includes, among other elements, a means to 
map a neighborhood to identify skills, equipment and vulnerable populations.  
 
GETTING STARTED: THE SAN FRANCISCO COMMUNITY DISASTER 
RESPONSE HUB PROPOSAL  
 
 The city developed the Community Disaster Response Hub concept over the last two years through 
the Community Disaster Planning Workgroup, under the excellent leadership of the Department of Public 
Health, with the advice of the Department of Emergency Management and various stakeholders, both 
public and non-profit. During the first year of planning, a facilitator/consultant assisted the planners in 
drafting The Concept for Operations. During 2008, the second year of planning, DEM will work with 
the administration of the San Francisco Public Libraries and the Library Commission to finalize an 
agreement to identify the citys libraries as Hub sites. The consultant firm, Circlepoint, will work with 
DPH to complete the framework for the Hub  a How-To template to initiate, develop and sustain the 
Hubs. At the same time, DEM will develop a standardized orientation/training program for all libraries 
and stakeholders. DEM and the other stakeholders intend to complete this phase by November 2008. In 
the meantime, the city intends to run a pilot program in two specific communities  Chinatown and the 
Bayview  culminating in a drill. A two-year Federal grant funded the initial drafting and implementation 
of the plan in the two pilot communities. The grant expires on December 31, 2008. 
The proposal9 is still in the discussion phase. When completed, some responsibility for Hub planning will 
belong to the city. For example, the city will conduct initial outreach to communities, designate city-
owned sites and assign staff, assist communities in the maintenance of data by identifying supplies and 
developing record keeping protocol, and conduct educational and practice drills involving both city 
workers and community representatives. Some responsibility for Hub planning will belong to the 
communities. For example, each community must first finalize a plan specific to the needs of its residents, 
and identify its local resources and vulnerabilities, albeit consistent with the guidelines provided by the 
city as to what it can realistically provide. Once finalized, the community, with city assistance, must 
sustain the plan by updating and maintaining data and keeping designated organizations working together.  
 Establishing a Hub for community response will be accomplished in stages, rst by the city, 
then by the city and communities working together, as follows:  
 
                                                        
7The Kobe Earthquake, Washington University in St. Louis, http://artsci.wustl.edu/~copeland/kobe.html 
8 Washington Military Department, Emergency Management Division, Map Your Neighborhood, 
http://emd.wa.gov/myn/index.shtml (MYP) 
9 All references to the Proposal are to the October 2007 draft of the Concept of Operations for Community 
Disaster Response Hubs.  
7    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
 Geographical Boundaries for Hubs: Now, the proposal envisions that the Hubs may operate 
from each of the 25 San Francisco Public Libraries. If the Hubs do not operate from the Libraries, 
they will be located in another city-owned and maintained site.  
 
 Selecting Communities: The city will initiate planning for Hubs, neighborhood by 
neighborhood, first identifying the citys most vulnerable communities, i.e. those on unstable 
ground and with dense populations.  
 
Some communities will have unusual requirements; some already have developed a community 
organization; some have trained NERT teams, others do not. The Financial District, for example, 
has a large commuter population during the day and residents housed in high rises during the 
night. The Business Owners and Managers Association (BOMA), supporting the largest offices in 
the city, encourages NERT training and disaster preparedness and would be a vital resource in 
forming a Financial District Hub. 
 
 Invitation: The city will issue an invitation to community-based entities to introduce the 
Community Disaster Response Hub concept.  
 
To secure broad representation within a district the city must include each communitys unique 
non-profit, faith-based and community organizations, schools and interested residents. In 
addition, each of the communities surrounding the libraries is made up of smaller neighborhoods, 
often organized around local shopping districts. The city will need sources within the community 
to identify which community/district leaders and organizations it should bring to the table.  
 
 Community Planning/Steering Group: Ideally, a community planning group will grow out of 
the initial meeting.  
 
The community-planning group will develop its own emergency response plan specific to the 
character of its own community using the city-prepared template. The city will facilitate the 
planning and offer other support and overall management, but the community must provide the 
leadership. The city and community steering group should develop the grounds rules for 
organizing each Hub and developing each communitys plan early and with great care to 
encourage collective objectivity.  
 
 Identification of Vulnerabilities and Strengths Specific to the Local Community: In order to 
refine the Hub model to meet the needs of its community the planning group should initially 
create a list of community vulnerabilities and strengths. Potential vulnerabilities could include 
large numbers of elderly residents, schools and day care centers, unreinforced masonry buildings, 
and/or restricted open space. Potential strengths could be accessible open space and/or adequate 
medical facilities.  
 
 Inventory of Resources: Representatives from the city will possess knowledge of the citys 
resources and emergency response strategy. Community representatives will reflect the concerns 
of their community and present the needs and wants of their constituency. The planning group 
will then develop a list of its own community resources, including facilities, available supplies, 
local expertise, and potential volunteers. 
8    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
 
STRENGTHENING AND SUSTAINING THE DISTRICT HUB PROGRAM: 
 RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
 recognizes that the ambitious Hub plan is in its infancy. Based on its examination of the 
evolving Hub plan,  has considered what communities will need to sustain a successful 
emergency response program and what the responsibility of the city will be to help communities. 
 now makes the following observations and recommendations:  
 
PROGRAM OVERSIGHT 
 recognizes the work done by the Department of Public Health in spearheading the Hub concept. 
Without DPHs leadership, the city might not have obtained the federal grant, completed drafting the 
initial proposal, and organized and run the pilot program. 
The Department of Emergency Management, though, is the lead city agency for coordinating disaster 
preparedness. The Hub will be communicating across city departments and between the EOC and the 
communities. Coordination will not be exclusive to emergency medical response and relief, but will range 
from health and human services, including shelter, food and water supplies, to interaction with NERT. 
DEM should now oversee integrating the plan into the overall Strategic Plan and assist communities to 
develop individual plans by 1) initiating planning in each community; 2) helping to sustain and maintain 
the district program; and 3) conducting exercises and practice drills within the community. 
While other departments should continue to be involved in the planning, preparation and activation of the 
Hubs according to their roles in disaster response, if DEM and the San Francisco Public Libraries agree 
that the libraries will be the designated hub sites, the library should be responsible for orientation and 
training of its staff and to perform the role of Hub Coordinators. 
 
FUNDING 
At the conclusion of the grant period,  believes that DEM should take the responsibility for 
obtaining funding to assure that the Hub plan becomes an ongoing program.  
 
CHAIN OF COMMAND 
The current proposal calls for the Hubs to communicate directly with the EOC to a section activated for 
that purpose, the Community Branch. The Community Branch will in turn refer matters from the Hubs to 
the appropriate sections within the EOC or directly to the departments. As departmental command centers 
become operational, they will communicate directly with the Hubs, as well.  
In case of a disaster, Hub personnel are to self-activate (not wait for a call down from headquarters) to 
pre-assigned sites. Activation will occur simultaneously with the activation of the citys EOC and 
Emergency District Coordination Centers and be running within six hours of a declared emergency or 
major disaster.  
Although the Hub concept is for a coordinating operation not a control or service operation, the Hub 
operations still must fit into the Incident Command System (ICS). The ICS commander will be reporting 
through the Community Branch to the command of the EOC overseen by the Department of Emergency 
Management. Each Hub must have a clearly defined and identified Incident Commander capable of 
9    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
understanding the relationship to the disaster response as a whole and able to examine response needs 
within the Hub community. The staff of each Hub must also be trained in the ICS. In addition, because 
disasters can occur in any time, alternate ICS commanders need to be prepared to assume responsibility as 
well.  
 
STAFFING 
Employees of the city will staff each District Hub. Although the Hubs will have no permanent employees, 
the city will have initiated the establishment of the Hub, facilitated its planning, and assisted in 
maintaining its organization. In order to function in their emergency response role as District Hub staff 
after an emergency, city employees should have met frequently with the steering group of their assigned 
Hub, be familiar with their Hubs plan, and have participated in the drills and table top exercises.  
The initial proposal called for Department of Public Health employees to staff and run the Hubs.  
recognized that many DPH employees would be among the citys most valuable first responders in case 
of a major disaster. DPH will be responsible for medical response for the residents of the city in any 
incident or disaster from treating mass casualties to mass immunization in the case of an infectious 
disease outbreak. Administering, coordinating and communicating resource requirements might not be the 
best use for an employee with direct medical training or expertise in medical management. 
In addition, the Department of Public Health itself acknowledges that, in case of widespread catastrophe, 
its staff will be stretched thin executing emergency medical response activities. The proposal anticipated 
that if DPH workers were unavailable, the city would assign other city employees. (There would be a 
detailed Manual at each Hub so that any trained Disaster Worker could step in and fill the coordinating 
function.)   
 recommended and the Department of Public Health and the Department of Emergency 
Management are now reviewing the proposed staffing of the Hubs. With the understanding that the city 
would be the best served if DPH employees were available for medical emergency response duties, they 
are now considering whether the San Francisco Libraries or other departments should staff the Hubs. 
Staffing needs may vary from district to district. Although the Hub will not be a service center or even a 
referral service, individuals will come to the Hub for advice or assistance, and the Hub will need staff to 
handle the influx. In addition to the Incident Commander,  has identified other potential staff 
functions, including staff to intake information, coordinate with the city, handle walk-ins, direct services 
and provide back-up security.  advises that the Department of Emergency Management review the 
Hub plan for each community, identify duties, responsibilities and the organizational structure for each 
major response function, and from that, develop criteria for staffing and designating command and 
alternate command.  
   
LOCATING THE HUB 
At this time, the proposal calls for District Hubs to be located physically in city-owned Department of 
Public Health sites, community clinics or mental health clinics throughout the city. Sites must maximize 
assistance, communication, command and control. Initial criteria for locating the physical site from which 
the Hub will administer its operations include: 1) logistics support, i.e., accessibility to the open spaces 
planned for NERT staging, for accommodation of refugees, and for providing various emergency medical 
and social services; 2) population vulnerabilities and density; and 3) seismic stability of ground and 
seismic retrofitting of selected structure.  
Designating Department of Public Health facilities as Hub sites had many advantages, including that 
medical emergency response and relief will be a key part of disaster response, the clinics are well 
10    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
dispersed throughout the city and have substantial emergency equipment and professional staffs. 
Notwithstanding the Hub plan, though, communities will need medical emergency facilities to 
supplement hospitals or field care clinics and they will look to local city-run clinics as a medical resource. 
The Community Disaster Response Hub does not function as a service center, making the use of city-run 
clinics as Hub sites inconsistent with their role as needed medical facilities.  believes that some 
city-run clinics should continue to focus on providing medical services and expand their ability to provide 
emergency medical services in case of a major disaster10 and are not the right locations from which to 
coordinate other city services.  
 encourages the selection of the libraries as the operating centers for the Hubs. Libraries are spread 
geographically throughout the city, many have been retrofitted to new seismic standards, and they are 
recognized by members of the community as a resource for information. 
Whichever city-owned and maintained site the city chooses, though,  believes sites should be pre-
determined and the location known in the community. Nevertheless,  also recognizes that pre-
designating a Hub can only work if the community is highly organized and has a well-established Hub 
plan. In communities that have not been so organized, the Hub should operate out of the field-care-
service-centers and/or staging areas. In other words, the Community Disaster Response Hub proposal 
must be flexible so it can respond to needs, as they exist in each community.  
  
COORDINATION WITH COMMUNITY EMERGENCY RESPONSE TEAMS (NERT) 
NERT, a program of the San Francisco Fire Department, organizes and trains residents to prepare 
individually for disasters and to become first responders themselves to assist others in their community 
when city rescue services have become overwhelmed.  
When a community has an active NERT program, the city should include local NERT representatives in 
the initial district planning meetings. Presence of active NERT teams where communities are planning 
Hub programs would supplement and enhance planning in those communities from the beginning. 
Communities with active NERT programs already have committed volunteers who are pre-identified, 
prepared and willing to respond in case of a disaster. In addition, NERT organizes around the same 
Emergency Districts as the proposed district Hubs using established fire battalion communication lines.  
The establishment of a Hub program in a community could enlarge the volunteer base of a communitys 
NERT program, as well, through increased community commitment to disaster preparedness and 
knowledge of the program.  
 
SUPPLYING THE HUB  
The Hub will be the administrative location for communication and coordination in the community from 
which the Hub Incident Commander and staff will direct area communications and resources. As such, 
each Hub site must be equipped with the appropriate supplies to carry out its activities and maintain its 
own staff during the time of recovery. The Department of Emergency Management should supply the 
                                                        
10 The recent Community Disaster Response Hub proposal refers to the need for Hubs to establish a site for 
medical care with their community as soon as possible. In future papers  plans to address the managing 
mass casualties and the need for the primary care clinics in the City to be involved as first responders to a medical 
emergency.  
 
11    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
Hub site itself with a dedicated non-perishable supply cache, including not only medical supplies and 
emergency supplies necessary to sustain the citys Hub workers, but administrative supplies necessary to 
maintain records.  
The city should develop each Hub a list of perishable supplies noting where the Hub staff can obtain 
them.  
 
INVENTORY OF RESOURCES AND RECORD KEEPING 
Record keeping will be essential for triage, service availability, supply needs, socials services and FEMA 
reimbursement.  
The Department of Emergency Management will need to work with the community-planning group to 
pre-identify the resources that each group has and which each group may need in order to assist in 
disaster response. For example, some faith-based organizations may have kitchens adequate to prepare 
food for large numbers and a corner grocery may have the necessary food supplies. Once committed 
organizations share lists of available resources, the planning group should create a local resource 
inventory. The participating organizations should sign pre-disaster agreements, so the planning group can 
rely upon the resources that each leader/organization will make available.  
During disaster response, responders will need to know what supplies both the city and community 
organizations are providing and using, how much is remaining and what supplies they need. In order to 
maintain a comprehensive inventory of community resources, community-planning groups will need 
support from the Department of Emergency Management.  believes that San Francisco should 
include in its budgetary planning for emergency preparedness staff support to maintain and keep current 
this information.  
Ultimately, if the impact of the disaster reaches a scale of a federally declared emergency, FEMA 
reimbursement and private funding will be available for volunteer expenditures. The records that help 
communities track their resources are mandatory to seek reimbursement. The city could create an 
environment of Good Will by helping volunteer organizations to understand that by participating in the 
Hub program and identifying resources they are prepared to make available to the community, they could 
be eligible for reimbursement. Such knowledge could, in turn, trigger participation in the Hub program.  
 
VOLUNTEERS AND RECORD KEEPING 
Based on its familiarity with the resources and abilities of individuals and organizations within the 
community, the Hub steering group can develop the criteria required for specific volunteer duties within 
the community, identify individuals and/or groups and prepare a list of volunteer resources. Many 
communities have residents and organizations with expertise that would be critical to recovery in the 
community during the immediate aftermath of a catastrophic event. A community could expedite its 
recovery if the community had pre-identified residents with useful expertise and they had practiced how 
they could assist. Useful expertise includes medical knowledge, food preparation, telecommunication 
skills and knowledge of community building sites. The latter includes architects and contractors familiar 
with not only the basic principles of structural stability, but with specific essential structures within the 
community.  
Communities should have a means for pre-identifying and maintaining a list of expected participants in 
their Hub plan. In addition to residents and organizations that will be acting as responders, it is imperative 
for the community to know who will staff the Hub from the city and whom each organization designates 
to coordinate activities and communicate information. During a disaster, there will be much confusion 
and responders will naturally ignore many procedures. In order to control who is a volunteer, the city 
12    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
should issue ID badges to identify volunteers. Pre-identified volunteers could receive their badges ahead 
of time, be trained and pre-assigned. To avoid a situation where spontaneous volunteers dispense 
information and give orders, the city needs to develop a plan to verify, identify and supervise walk-ons.  
The city officially swears-in NERT volunteers, which includes them under the citys workers 
compensation plan in case of injury. The Hub proposal has not included this for volunteers involved in 
the Hub program. The Department of Emergency Management should address the appropriateness of 
following this procedure with Hub volunteers. 
 
COMMUNICATIONS 
The Hub will be the administrative location for communication and coordination in the community from 
which the Hub Incident Commander and staff will direct all area communications and resources. As such, 
the Hub sites must be equipped with the appropriate communication equipment and training. Training 
should include the development of communication protocol, and the use, location and availability of 
equipment, including batteries, repairs and spares.  
As the program develops, the city, along with each Hub, will need to decide how community 
organizations will collect and distribute real time information to the EOC, various departmental operation 
centers and the field care sites within its community, the extent of communication that this will require, 
what electronic means are available, and what back-up plans are needed. At this time, the Hub plan 
appears to call for reliance on runners among the local sites, the METS11 lines within fire stations for 
communication with the EOC and departments, Ham Radio Operators certified by the FCC and identified 
through the NERT program, plus whatever communication availability exists in the pre-designated City-
site to augment the METS lines.  
Ideally, the Hub should have state-of-the-art communication equipment at its command. At this time, the 
city has not dedicated communication equipment to Hub use.  recommends that the Department of 
Telecommunication and Information Services provide input in how to develop plans to provide adequate 
communication equipment and training.  
 
SECURITY 
During the aftermath of a disaster, law enforcement will be over-extended and not available. Before and 
during a disaster, the Hubs caches of stored supplies will need to be secured as well. Once again, the Hub 
should pre-identify anticipated security needs for each location and design security provisions.  
Although volunteers will have no law enforcement powers, each Hub will need a gatekeeper because 
individuals will approach the hub for services or referrals. The hub will need staff to patrol and meet and 
greet service seekers and, if necessary, help deter unacceptable behavior. Department of Public Health 
employees or representatives from non-profit organizations familiar with crowd control who are 
accustomed to interacting with residents under stress should be among those the city pre-identifies as 
potential security staff personnel. Private security companies can also provide expertise on security within 
a community.  
 
  recommends that the San Francisco Police Department provide input in how to develop plans 
to provide security and commitment for police response.  
                                                        
11 Multicorn Emergency Telephone Systems. 
13    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
   
VULNERABLE POPULATIONS 
In the past, the Department of Public Health has maintained a list of disabled and/or vulnerable residents 
who volunteered to be included on a list of those the city should contact after a major disaster and assist, 
if necessary. The city is discontinuing the Disaster Registry. The Department of Human Resources will 
maintain a list of vulnerable residents, but this list will include only residents receiving city-run In-Home 
Supportive Services.  
The elimination of the Disaster Registry Program concerns . Vulnerable populations need an 
emergency response plan for wellness checks to provide assistance when needed, whether it is supplies 
for sheltering in place, in-home medical care and/or evacuation as necessary.  
The establishment of an active Community Disaster Response Hub program in a community could 
expand the city-run program to include vulnerable residents with whom local organizations are familiar, 
but do not fit into the restricted city definition. Hub planning groups could maintain a list of pre-identified 
residents and assign volunteers to check up on their status. Then all who may need help will at least get 
someone to visit them. 
 believes that maintaining a comprehensive local community list of the more vulnerable among us  
the disabled, elderly and children -- would be an ideal function for a highly developed Community 
Disaster Response Hub and could evolve into one of its prime responsibilities.  
  
PUBLICITY 
City government through the Department of Emergency Management has embarked upon a public 
relations campaign called 72hours.org to encourage self-reliance among its residents, but the public needs 
to know where to go within its community to get specific assistance, as well. Each community Hub 
should pre-identify and widely distribute within the community a list of community resources and a map 
showing pre-designated sites for resources and services. Widespread knowledge of available resources 
can free personnel at the Hubs from responding to individual inquiries so they can concentrate on their 
communication and coordination functions.  
In addition to other community organizations, schools located within each Emergency District must be 
involved in planning for the Hub and in the distribution of information. 
 The city will need to reach a balance between release of appropriate information and an avoidance of a 
security breach, understanding that the Hub plan will only be as successful as the level of community 
participation and that publicity can increase awareness and participation.  
 
PRE-DISASTER COORDINATION DRILLS AND EXERCISES 
Even if local communities and the city have successfully carried out every task discussed in this paper -- 
organizing communities, individuals and groups, identifying and categorizing resources and establishing 
sites -- neither the city nor communities can be prepared without frequent exercise and drill to practice 
how they will function together when a disaster occurs.  strongly recommends that that the Hub 
steering group hold monthly meetings to address issues that will arise or to make decisions regarding 
logistics for response.  
City employees assigned to a specific Hub need to be familiar with the community and have met and 
practiced with the involved community organizations; community organizations need to know how well 
their plans will work. Drills should take place at least once a year by the city and all participating 
14    
THE HUB CONCEPT: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE 
 
community organizations committed to providing service. Japan, for example, which is about the same 
size as California, has a national earthquake drill each year on the anniversary of its largest quake. The 
city could activate the Hubs and communities could participate in a practice drill each year on the 
anniversary of the 1906 earthquake.  
Without this type of practice, a community cannot be considered prepared. 
 
SUSTAINING COMMUNITY DISASTER RESPONSE HUBS PROGRAM 
There is no guarantee that the Community Disaster Response Hub program will be ongoing when the 
grant expires. It is essential that the Department of Emergency Management make initiating the Hub 
concept and sustaining the program a priority. At this time, identification of vulnerabilities and strengths 
with city communities and assessment of resources and needs of these diverse communities is incomplete.  
If the target pilot communities of Chinatown and the Bay View respond to the pilot plan and move 
forward with a Hub program, their success, enthusiasm and state of preparedness can encourage the 
adoption of the Hub program and provision of permanent funding.  encourages the Department of 
Emergency Management to become an active partner with the Department of Public Health, the 
Department of Human Services and NERT in bringing the two pilot programs in Chinatown and the Bay 
View on line before December 31, 2008.  
 believes that the Department of Emergency Management should now take the responsibility for 
obtaining funding to assure that the Hub plan becomes an ongoing program within the citys Strategic 
Emergency Response Plan and manage the Hub program.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AFTER THE DISASTER: 
REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
 
 
 
 REPORT 
Adopted by the  Board of Directors  
May 19, 2010 
 
Released 
July 1, 2010 
 
Task force members: Irene Avetyan, Christopher Barkley, Anthony Bruzzone, Lisa Fisher, Sanford 
Stadtfeld, Brian Stokle 
Task force chair: Jacinta McCann 
Lead staff: Sarah Karlinsky,  Deputy Director 
Graphic support: EDAW and Nelson\Nygaard 
 
.org/resilient_city 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
The next major earthquake that hits the  will wreak havoc on our transportation systems.  Transit 
lines will collapse and rail tracks will be broken. Transbay road, rail and public transit links will be 
disrupted. Highways and surface streets will be closed by the failure of pavement and the accumulation of 
debris. Power system failures will immobilize electric-powered transit, including BART and Muni. 
Maintenance facilities such as yards and garages will be damaged. Airport runways will be rendered 
unusable. Even worse, damage to the transportation network will limit the ability of firefighters, public 
safety officers, utility workers, debris removal teams and medical personnel to travel where they are 
needed. 
This paper is part of s After the Disaster work. It focuses on one essential component of our 
infrastructure  transportation  and proposes a plan to rebuild quickly and effectively after the disaster, 
while increasing our resiliency in the process.  
The scope of this paper is limited in the following four important ways: 
1. It only addresses the physical infrastructure of our transportation system  it does not address the 
human resources needed to operate and manage our transportation infrastructure.   
2. It does not include a financial analysis of what it would cost to both retrofit our transportation 
infrastructure before the disaster and rebuilding our transportation infrastructure after the disaster. 
3. It does not include a socio-economic analysis to determine where the most vulnerable populations 
are within our region and how to serve those populations in both the near and long term 
rebuilding process.   
4. It does not address freight movement.  
Much depends on getting the transportation aspects of our disaster planning work right. Failure to plan for 
the recovery of our transportation systems after an earthquake likely will create a number of problems:  
 out-migration of workforce and jobs 
 delays in the restoration of infrastructure caused by lengthy regulatory and contractual processes 
 debate over the allocation of recovery funds  
 protracted fuel and water shortages and increased delivery costs 
 constrained transportation access to and from the region 
 loss of overall regional competitiveness 
 politicization of restoration projects 
 believes that San Franciscos resiliency relies on the redundancy of our transportation 
network. When one piece of infrastructure in a transportation corridor fails, there must be another way to 
get people and goods where they need to go. This paper focuses on the transportation network  the 
bridges, tunnels, rails, vessels and roadways  that serve San Francisco. We analyze the corridors that 
connect the city to the surrounding region, as well as the transportation network within San Francisco.  
  
3   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
S RESILIENT CITY INITIATIVE 
Before the Disaster  
Our Before the Disaster work has focused on key questions related to disaster planning. What do we 
need to be doing now to make sure that our built environment can recover quickly from a major 
earthquake? Which existing buildings need to be retrofitted, and to what standard of performance? How 
do we encourage better performance from new buildings? How do we strengthen our lifelines so that our 
buildings are serviceable after an earthquake?  addresses these and other questions in four Before 
the Disaster papers published in the February 2009 edition of the Urbanist. 
Disaster Response  
Disaster Response focuses on activities during the days and weeks following a catastrophic event, 
including damage assessment, ensuring the safety of responders, communications and control, 
evacuation, public health and safety and restoration of vital systems.  has recently completed a 
paper on the culture of preparedness, which focuses on disaster planning and preparedness in San 
Franciscos neighborhoods. 
After the Disaster  
Our After the Disaster task force is asking several key questions: After a catastrophe, are we prepared to 
rebuild our city to a state even better than it was before? What plans and systems of governance does 
San Francisco need if it is to be effectively positioned to rebuild? What lessons can be learned from 
recovery experiences in lower Manhattan, New Orleans, Haiti, Chile, China and beyond? This task force 
will be working to complete major papers on long-term recovery, covering the topics of transportation, 
governance, planning and housing. 
 
SAN FRANCISCOS TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE AND ITS 
VULNERABILITIES 
The City of San Francisco and the entire San Francisco  are vulnerable to natural disasters, 
particularly earthquakes. While other disasters, such as fires, industrial accidents, landslides, tsunamis and 
acts of terrorism are also possible, a major earthquake is the most likely event for which our regional 
emergency planning prepares. 
Among the many faults that cleave Northern California, the Hayward and San Andreas faults pose the 
greatest threats. The 1906 earthquake and fire was the Big One of the 20th century, caused by 
movement on the San Andreas Fault and exacerbated by the vulnerabilities of the Citys utility 
infrastructure and buildings. The 1906 earthquake is estimated to have measured 7.9 on the moment 
magnitude scale  a scale seismologists use to measure the energy released by an earthquake, instead of 
the Richter scale more commonly known among the general public. Together, the earthquake and the 
consequent fire destroyed three-quarters of the city1  more than 500 square blocks  and are estimated to 
have claimed 3,000 lives. The 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake was also caused by movement along the San 
Andreas Fault measuring 6.9 on the moment magnitude scale. While effects on transportation facilities 
were localized, some of the necessary restoration has yet to be completed2  more than two decades after 
the event. 
It is assumed that the next big earthquake will be more intense than the 1989 Loma Prieta event, and 
could easily sever transportation links to the north, east or south. It is impossible to predict which links 
will break, but it is possible to envision a break in each link and to prepare for those events. 
 
4   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
DESIGNING LIFELINES TO PERFORM IN THE EXPECTED EARTHQUAKE, 
PLANNING TO RECOVER FROM THE EXTREME EARTHQUAKE.  
s Resilient City effort pegs performance goals for all the major lifelines (vital transportation 
systems and other infrastructure) to the expected earthquake that is, the seismic event that is likely to 
happen within the lifetime of the infrastructure. s Before the Disaster seismic performance goals 
are stated in terms of general states of damage and repair over an extended recovery period, under the 
assumption that an expected earthquake has occurred. We chose the expected quake rather than the 
extreme earthquake because it is a major event that can reasonably be expected to occur once during the 
useful life of a structure or lifeline system. However, for purposes of planning for actions that should be 
taken restore transportation systems following an earthquake, a more extreme earthquake should be 
considered to ensure that preparations are sufficient for San Francisco to recover from a potentially much 
greater earthquake. Additionally, because earthquakes on different faults will likely have different effects 
on transportation systems around the region, the effects of different earthquakes should be considered. 
In our Before the Disaster work, in which we examined the performance of buildings in San Francisco, 
we defined the expected earthquake as one measuring 7.2 on the moment magnitude scale, occurring on 
the San Andreas Fault somewhere on the San Francisco Peninsula. We also defined the extreme 
earthquake for San Francisco as one of magnitude 7.9 on the San Andreas Fault, also on the Peninsula 
(i.e., a reprise of the 1906 earthquake). While this earthquake would have a severe impact on 
transportation systems in San Francisco and on the Peninsula, a similar event on the Hayward Fault could 
more severely debilitate transportation for the entire . Some of the regions most important 
transportation features  including BART, Interstates 80 and 580, and State Route 24, all of which are 
vital links within the region and to neighboring regions  cross or lie immediately adjacent to the 
Hayward Fault.3 The extreme earthquake on the Hayward Fault would rupture both the northern and 
southern segments of the fault in a seismic event measuring 7.0 on the moment magnitude scale.4 This 
report considers extreme events on both the San Andreas and Hayward faults, each of which would 
severely compromise our regional transportation infrastructure. 
THE EFFECTS OF THE 1989 LOMA PRIETA EARTHQUAKE ON THE S 
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM 
While the effects of the Loma Prieta earthquake were minor in comparison with those of recent 
earthquakes (for example, the 2010 earthquakes in Haiti, Chile, China and the Baja California region of 
Mexico), it still had a substantial impact on the s transportation system. 
  Rapid Transit: The BART rail system, including the Transbay Tube, was virtually 
undamaged and closed only for post-earthquake inspection. As one of the few means of transbay 
access into San Francisco in the days following the earthquake, daily ridership increased by 
90,000, a roughly 50 percent jump, in the week after the earthquake (from 218,000 to 342,000). 
Today, ridership is at the post - Loma Prieta level of 342,0005 passengers per day, which means 
there is less flexibility in the system to accommodate the spike in trips that would occur after a 
major disaster. If transbay demand increased by a similar proportion, the BART ridership would 
spike from 342,000 to over 500,000 daily riders. If gas prices and transit ridership both continue 
to rise, daily BART ridership will likely exceed the high of 374,000 average daily riders that was 
reached in July to September 2008 prior to the economic contraction. 
 San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge, Interstate 80: The Bay Bridge was repaired and reopened 
to traffic in just one month. However, the earthquake made it clear that the Bay Bridge, like many 
of Californias toll bridges, required major repair or replacement, for long-term viability and 
safety. The replacement of the eastern span of the Bay Bridge has been in planning, design and 
construction for two decades, and still is not complete. 
 Cypress Structure, Interstate Freeway 880: The Cypress Structure, a 1.6-mile long, bi-level 
elevated freeway constructed of reinforced concrete with four lanes on each deck, collapsed 
5   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
between the MacArthur Maze (the convergence of Interstate Highways 80, 580 and 880 east of 
the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge) and 16th Street in Oakland, claiming 42 lives. Completed 
in 1997, a single-level elevated freeway structure around West Oakland replaced the Cypress 
Structure, enabling the neighborhood previously divided by the freeway to be re-unified. 
 Central Freeway, U.S. Highway 101: San Franciscos Central Freeway (part of U.S. Highway 
101 and a link to the Bay Bridge skyway) was another concrete double-deck structure. It did not 
collapse, but was ultimately torn down. Originally terminating at Franklin Street and Golden Gate 
Avenue near San Franciscos Civic Center, the section past Fell Street was demolished first, 
followed by the section between Mission and Fell streets. The section from Mission Street to 
Market Street was rebuilt (completed September 2005) as a single-deck elevated freeway. The 
remainder was replaced as a surface boulevard on Octavia Street.  
 Transbay ferries: Ferry service between San Francisco and various points in the East Bay 
(Oakland, Richmond, Berkeley, Alameda, etc.), was expanded and invigorated during the month-
long closure of the Bay Bridge, as an alternative to the overcrowded BART transbay services. 
The Vallejo Baylink ferry service, started in 1986, saw a big increase in ridership during Loma 
Prieta earthquake recovery. Within one week after the earthquake, three vessels were put into 
operation between Vallejo and San Francisco. The passenger-only ferry services maintained their 
popularity after the earthquake and are a mainstay of the North Bay commute market. 
 In the immediate aftermath of the 1989 San Francisco earthquake, Red and White Fleet provided 
free transportation to 15,000 stranded commuters and initiated new services to Richmond and 
Oakland with an expanded fleet of ferries borrowed from operations outside the . 
 Embarcadero Freeway, state Route 480: The earthquake forced the closure of San Franciscos 
largely unloved Embarcadero Freeway (state Route 480). It was replaced with a surface 
boulevard with a dedicated right of way for Muni, opening up San Franciscos eastern waterfront 
to public access.  
 Southern Embarcadero Freeway, Interstate 280: Seismic damage also led to the long-term 
closure of Interstate Highway 280 in San Francisco (north of Highway 101), another concrete 
freeway. The highway, which has double-deck segments, remained closed for seven years as 
restoration plans were debated, delayed and finally implemented. The City is considering, as part 
of the high-speed rail system, pulling the freeway south to Cesar Chavez and replacing it with a 
surface boulevard.  In that event, the seismic considerations would be greatly reduced. 
The Loma Prieta earthquake was a watershed event. While lives were lost in the , the 
earthquakes epicenter was located 60 miles south of the city. The main shock lasted less than 20 seconds, 
a short duration that mitigated what could have been much more serious damage.  
Loma Prieta made transbay travel between the East Bay and San Francisco completely rail- and water-
dependent. During the one-month Bay Bridge closure, transit use from the East Bay peaked and 
automobile use dropped. The  improvised, since there was no regional plan to deal with the 
emergency. BART ran additional trains, and ferries were brought in from other cities to support the 
recovery phase.  
Figure 1 provides comparative ridership data before and after of the Loma Prieta earthquake. 
6   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
Figure 1: LOMA PRIETA EARTHQUAKE TRANSBAY CORRIDOR  
 Pre-Quake Post Quake Change Change 
(October 17, (Tuesday-(percent) 
1989) Thursday 
Average) 
BART Transbay (All Day) 102,000 219,000 117,000 115% 
BART System (All Day) 218,000 342,667 124,667 57% 
Caltrain (AM Peak) 3,560 4,443 883 25% 
Alameda Ferry (AM Peak) N/A 632  N/A 
Oakland Ferry (AM Peak) N/A 1,830  N/A6 
Berkeley Ferry (AM Peak) N/A 528 N/A N/A 
Richmond Ferry (AM N/A 453 N/A N/A 
Peak) 
Vallejo Ferry (AM Peak) N/A 506 N/A N/A 
Golden Gate Ferry (AM 1,510 2763 1,253 83% 
Peak) 
Bay Bridge (All day) 243,000 0 -243,000 N/A 
Bay Bridge (AM Peak) 59,000 0 -59,000 N/A 
Golden Gate Bridge (AM 25,000 28,655 3,655 15% 
Peak) 
Richmond Bridge (AM 6,500 11,102 4,602 71% 
Peak) 
San Mateo Bridge (AM 13,500 18,430 4,930 37% 
Peak) 
Dumbarton Bridge (AM 14,200 15,013 813 6% 
Peak) 
Source: RIDES for  Commuters (S. Beraldo) 1989  
 
These data indicate that almost 40 percent of automobile users switched to transit during this period (this 
underestimates the impact on transit however, because it counts Richmond Bridge users as highway users 
when in fact many of them crossed the bridge only to get to the Lark Ferry). In addition, other 
surveys conducted by the University of California, Berkeley estimate the switch to be about 50 percent. 
When we model potential scenarios after an earthquake,  assumes that about half of automobile 
users (both single occupant and carpoolers) will switch to transit if the Bay Bridge is damaged. In 
addition, we assume that about 35 percent will change arrival and departure times.  
7   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
The emergency closure of the Bay Bridge from October 27 to November 2, 2009 demonstrated how 
BART might perform in the days following a major disaster were the Bay Bridge to be closed. As shown 
in Figure 2, BARTs three all-time high ridership days occurred during the closure while the bridge was 
being repaired, with a peak of 442,000 daily riders on Thursday, Oct. 29, 2009. The previous all-time 
daily high did not occur during an emergency or a Bay Bridge closure, but when the Oakland Raiders and 
San Francisco Giants both played home-field day games on September 8, 2009, where ridership was 
405,000. 
The BART system performed well during the Bay Bridge closure, with crowded trains and stations, and 
some minor delays. However, with daily ridership projected to increase, BARTs capacity challenges 
must be addressed sooner rather than later. 
 
Figure 2: BART RIDERSHIP DURING EMERGENCY CLOSURE AS COMPARED TO OTHER 
HIGH USAGE DATES 
Ridership Day Date Events 
442,000 Thursday Oct. 29, 2009 Emergency Closure Bay Bridge  Day 2 
437,400 Friday 30 Oct 2009 Emergency Closure Bay Bridge  Day 3 
437,200 Wednesday 28 Oct 2009 Emergency Closure Bay Bridge  Day 1 
405,400 Monday 8 Sep 2009 Raiders vs. Broncos, Giants vs. Arizona 
395,300 Friday 4 Sep 2009 Planned Bay Bridge Closure (24 hr service) 
394,400 Thursday 19 Jun 2008 Spare the Air Day 
393,200 Monday 2 Nov 2009 Emergency Closure Bay Bridge  Day 6  Bridge 
Reopened at 9 AM after morning commute 
391,900 Wednesday 9 Apr 2008 Olympic Torch Relay; Giants vs. San Diego 
389,400 Friday 31 Aug 2007 Day before Planned Bay Bridge Closure 
381,200 Wednesday 13 June 2007 Police Concert, Giants vs. Toronto 
375,200 Tuesday 1 May 2007 MacArthur Maze Meltdown  Day 3 
376,000 Wednesday 4 October 2000 Baseball Playoffs, Giants vs. NY Mets, As vs. NY 
Yankees 
374,200 Thursday 3 May 2007 MacArthur Maze Meltdown  Day 5 
366,800 Tuesday 3 October 2000 Baseball Playoffs: As vs. NY Yankees 
357,100 Thursday 16 November Post Loma Prieta Earthquake  Bay Bridge 
1989 Closed  Day 29 
Source: http://articles.sfgate.com/2000-10-06/news/17664253_1_bart-patrons-bart-spokesman-mike-healy-trains,  
Ridership peaks compiled from BART news reports 5/08/2007, 5/25/2007, 6/14/2007, 8/31/2007, 4/10/2008, 9/9/2008, 10/29/2009, 
11/03/2009, and BART History page http://www.bart.gov/docs/BARThistory.pdf  
 
8   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
SAN FRANCISCO AS A REGIONAL HUB: TRANSPORTATION CORRIDORS INTO 
AND OUT OF SAN FRANCISCO 
San Francisco depends on its transportation infrastructure for its livelihood: for delivery of goods, 
tourism, shopping and getting people to work. After a disaster, especially a major earthquake, many vital 
transportation links may well be broken. The economy of the city, on the tip of the Peninsula, depends on 
restoring those links quickly. To maintain the viability of San Francisco as a major employment center, 
temporary links must be established as soon as possible. If businesses realize they cannot function in San 
Francisco, within as little as weeks they will likely relocate to other cities, whether in the  or 
beyond. If they believe that rebuilding will hamper normal operations for years, firms with multiple 
locations in the world will be especially likely to shift work to other offices.  
Our resiliency depends in part on the ability of transportation systems to withstand an earthquake, and on 
the speed and efficiency with which they are restored. In San Francisco, the transportation network 
includes the public transit and surface street networks administered by the Municipal Transportation 
Agency, and the waterfront, administered by the Port of San Francisco  all wholly under the auspices of 
the City and County of San Francisco. However, as San Francisco is a focal point of the , other 
transportation systems that are part of the regional network are vital to the citys recovery, including 
BART, AC Transit, Golden Gate Transit, SamTrans, Caltrain, Amtrak, the Port of Oakland, San 
Francisco International Airport, the Transbay Joint Powers Authority, Water Emergency Transportation 
Authority, and Caltrans. The failure or debilitation of any of these regional systems could paralyze San 
Francisco or a wider area. 
A majority of jobs in San Francisco are located in the citys Central Business District, in the northeast 
corner of the city. We can divide commute origins into four zones: North Bay (Marin and Sonoma 
Counties), East Bay (Solano, Contra Costa and Alameda Counties), South Bay (San Mateo and Santa 
Clara Counties) and from within San Francisco itself. Some of these zones, such as the South Bay and 
East Bay, have a number of links to San Francisco in the form of freeways and rail access. The presence 
of more than one link among various transportation modes increases redundancy, capacity and passenger 
options, and decreases the likelihood that all links in these corridors will fail. On the other hand, other 
zones, such as the North Bay, have very few links. Because most North Bay traffic can only use the 
Golden Gate Bridge or ferries with relatively low capacity, this corridor lacks redundancy. 
Today, there are approximately 350,000 employees7 in greater downtown San Francisco. Of these 
commuters, about 148,000 arrive at work on transit, about 40,000 arrive via walking or biking, and the 
remaining 158,000 (45 percent) arrive by car.8 This makes downtown San Francisco the least car-oriented 
job center in the entire region. 
Among all the people who work in downtown San Francisco, 42 percent live in San Francisco, 38 percent 
live in the East Bay counties (Contra Costa and Alameda), 13 percent live on the Peninsula (San Mateo 
County) or in the South Bay (Santa Clara County) and 7 percent live in the North Bay (Marin, Sonoma 
and Solano counties). Figure 3 shows the breakdown of commute patterns by origin location and by 
mode. 9 
There are other job centers beyond downtown that need to be taken into account when planning for 
disaster recovery. San Francisco job centers outside of downtown include Mission Bay, San Francisco 
State University; the University of California, San Francisco, Parnassas; and San Franciscos many 
hospitals such as San Francisco General Hospital and the Geary/Divisadero medical district. Hospitals are 
a critical link in the emergency response system. Their emergency medical and health functions are 
debilitated if hospital employees are unable to get to work. 
San Franciscos major hospitals are in Metropolitan Transportation Commission superdistricts 2 and 3 
(the Richmond and the Mission, which includes UCSF facilities). The MTC identifies about 47,000 
health, education or recreation employees in each of those superdistricts. A review of the job distribution 
reveals that about 40 percent to 45 percent of the employees in those superdistricts commute to jobs from 
9   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
outside of San Francisco.10 Assuming that medical jobs represent about half of the employment category, 
about 30,000 medical workers thus commute from outside of San Francisco. Planning for transportation 
redundancy to these other San Francisco locations is critical to facilitating the citys recovery. 
Figure 3: Commute patterns into downtown San Francisco, by mode and subregion, 2005  
 
Source: Caltrain Downtown Extension and Transbay Ridership Analysis prepared by Cambridge Systematics, Inc. for the Transbay 
Joint Powers Authority. Final Report, November 2008 and Transbay Ridership Analysis: Draft Report prepared for Alameda-Contra 
Costa Transit, Transbay Joint Powers Authority, Metropolitan Transportation Commission, San Francisco Water Transit Authority, 
August 2007.  Data derived from both draft and nal reports and analyzed in s Future of Downtown Report, January 2009, 
page 34. Additional analysis prepared by Cambridge Systematics, Inc and Arup. 
 
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM VULNERABILITIES 
When considering the expected earthquake, plans should address the likelihood of vital transportation 
system failures: 
 Liquefaction of poorly consolidated soils may cause tremendous damage to both the highway 
and street systems vital to San Francisco (see Figure 4.). The principal areas of concern are the 
Bay Bridge toll plaza in Oakland and northbound Highway 101 in San Francisco. Liquefaction 
may also affect I-80 between Emeryville and Vallejo, a very important lifeline connecting East 
Bay communities to employment in San Francisco. The Embarcadero, South of Market and 
Mission s are all constructed on soils that may liquefy.  
 Power outages, continuing or sporadic, may immobilize the San Francisco Municipal Railways 
electrically powered lines, at least temporarily. These lines include trolley coach, light rail, cable 
car and streetcar lines. Diesel or hybrid buses may be the only means available to provide 
emergency or basic mobility. 
 Road damage and debris may constrain movement for transit or personal vehicles. Damage 
should be anticipated in such areas as the Embarcadero, South of Market, the Marina and China 
Basin, and in general on surface streets on poor soils. This is a particular concern in the SOMA 
neighborhoods (as it was in 1906), as well as throughout the financial district. On Market Street 
the pavement may be disrupted and power lines may be down. Mobility in the Tenderloin may be 
limited by both debris and displaced people. Chinatown and parts of the Mission District may 
also face serious problems with debris removal and displacement of vulnerable populations such 
as the elderly. 
10   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
 Transit access to San Francisco will be constrained, at least temporarily. The Transbay Tube is 
vulnerable, as BART has not yet completed its seismic retrofitting. After an earthquake, the tube 
will be closed temporarily for inspection even if the tube does not fail. Damage to approaches and 
surface streets at either end of the Bay Bridge may limit bus access to San Francisco. 
 Fixed facilities, including offices, stations, depots, yards and garages for transit systems likely 
will suffer damage that could affect operations. In the recent Chilean earthquake, even as 
structures generally performed well, non-structural damage did occur and resulted in some loss of 
services. In the , fueling systems may be damaged and unusable for several days, 
pavements and soils may fail, and lighting and power systems may not function even if there has 
been little structural damage.  
 Ferry service demand may vastly exceed supply. Temporary ferry terminals may need to be 
created, to transport passengers particularly between San Francisco and the East Bay cities. 
Vessels may have to be procured under mutual aid agreements to provide the requisite system 
capacity. 
Figure 4 - Liquefaction Zones in San Francisco 
Source: California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology, nal edition February 2003 
http://gmw.consrv.ca.gov/shmp/download/pdf/ozn_sf.pdf 
 
CORRIDOR FAILURE ANALYSIS 
How much redundancy do we have in our transportation system? What do we do when our major 
transportation links fail?  has begun to analyze this issue by looking at redundancy on a corridor-
by-corridor basis. We analyzed the four major corridors serving San Francisco. We also examined what 
happens if all our fixed corridors fail and we must rely on ferries for all our passenger transportation 
needs. 
East Bay: Transbay Tube, Bay Bridge 
11   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
North Bay: Golden Gate Bridge, ferries 
South Bay: BART, Caltrain, I-280, Highway 101 
Intra San Francisco: Roads and rail 
Regional: Failure of all systems, leaving ferries only 
For each corridor, we describe what types of transportation failures could occur, the effects of those 
failures on transportation capacity within the corridor, and what should be done in the short, medium and 
long term if one or several transportation links are severed. 
 
1. EAST BAY  TRANSBAY TUBE, BAY BRIDGE 
There are three possible scenarios for transportation failures in this corridor: 
A. Bay Bridge intact, Transbay Tube closed 
B. Transbay Tube intact, Bay Bridge closed 
C. Both Bay Bridge and Transbay Tube closed 
 does not disregard the enormous efforts made to earthquake harden these systems and facilities11. 
These efforts are vital, and must continue in order to increase the likelihood that the Bay Bridge and the 
Transbay Tube will perform well in a major earthquake. We also must be prepared for something in the 
system to fail in a way that denies normal service, however. 
There are several sub-scenarios for these scenarios. For example, some portions of the BART system may 
survive and remain operable, but not other parts. The Bay Bridge itself may survive, but its approaches 
may be damaged due to liquefaction or ground subsidence. As a result, some transit vehicles may be able 
to use the bridge, but no other access may be provided. 
For this part of the exercise, we assume that the San Mateo Bridge and Golden Gate Bridge are 
undamaged and resume normal operations after temporary closures for inspection. 
It is also important to note that the Transbay corridor has less latent capacity available than it did in 1989. 
BARTs train control system is operating close to capacity (although, in theory, the system could 
accommodate about 30 percent more trains with a new control system). However, the San Francisco 
downtown stations, as noted in s Future of Downtown study, are already operating close to 
capacity. It will be necessary to shift some trips from the peaks to the shoulders of the commute periods, 
when more capacity is available. 
A. BAY BRIDGE INTACT, TRANSBAY TUBE CLOSED 
Under this scenario, BARTs current demand of about 150,000 to 175,000 daily transbay trips would be 
diverted to other modes of transportation. About 14,000 of those trips are in the peak hour (approximately 
7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.) from the East Bay into San Francisco. The peak hour is important from a transit 
planning perspective because it is the time of day when the transportation system is most utilized. 
Therefore, transportation plans need to be able to accommodate the number of trips taken during the peak 
hour. The 14,000 peak hour trips from the East Bay into San Francisco would be accommodated by 
additional Transbay buses. We assume that with work shift changes, about two-thirds of the 14,000 would 
be accommodated in the peak hour. 12 The other 4,600 would be accommodated in the off peak period. A 
number of tools could be used to meet this demand: 
 Additional bus service: An increase of 10,000 bus passengers hourly would require about 200 
additional buses (assuming that most buses could do a round trip in one hour from the East Bay), 
in addition to the 100 buses currently scheduled. The new Transbay Transit Center will 
accommodate this demand. 
 Bay Bridge use restrictions: Similar to the requirements that New York City put into effect in 
Lower Manhattan after September 11th, 2001, the bridge could be restricted to occupancy of not 
12   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
less than four per vehicle. In addition, contraflow lanes should be established on the lower deck 
for buses entering the city in the morning.  
 East Bay park-and-ride locations: In addition to using BART stations, cities would need to 
provide additional locations as park-and-ride areas for express buses operating into San 
Francisco. 
 HOV restrictions: Caltrans could increase all high occupancy vehicle occupancy requirements to 
not less than four per vehicle, to ensure that express buses can operate effectively.  
 Bridge access: Caltrans could designate special bus-only access to the Bay Bridge from locations 
such as West Grand Avenue. 
B. TRANSBAY TUBE INTACT, BAY BRIDGE CLOSED 
Under this scenario, the current demand of about 270,000 daily vehicular transbay trips via the Bay 
Bridge (about 325,000 person-trips) would either be curtailed or diverted. About 23,000 of those person-
trips are in the peak hour (approximately 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.) In addition, about 3,000 bus passenger-
trips would be affected. 13 
BART has capacity in the peak hour for another 10,000 to 15,000 passengers in its downtown stations, or 
about half the demand diverted from the Bridge. Loma Prieta numbers indicated that about half the 
automobile person-trips moved to transit. However, BART has rolling stock limitations, access 
constraints and other capacity constraints.  While BART plans to expand its fleet and upgrade train 
control systems to accommodate more trains, a disaster that occurs before these projects are completed 
will compel BART to make the best use of its existing resources: 
 Adapted service: BART could concentrate operations in the areas of its densest demand, and 
limit services to the furthest edges of the system. This would make equipment available to satisfy 
BARTs greatest demand, on the core of the system.  
 Additional bus service: As part of the realignment of BART service, the Fremont to San 
Francisco service could be suspended and trains could be turned at Bay Fair or other closer-in 
locations (fewer trains could also serve Pittsburg, for example, with trains turning at Pleasant 
Hill). East Bay buses could provide express bus service from these stations to San Francisco via 
the San Mateo Bridge. This approach would optimize BART resources and make effective use of 
available buses. 
 High-Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) restrictions: Caltrans could increase HOV occupancy 
requirements on Highway 101 to not less than four people per vehicle, to ensure that express 
buses can operate effectively. 
 Bridge access: Caltrans could designate special bus-only access to the San Mateo and Dumbarton 
Bridges. 
 
C. TRANSBAY TUBE AND BAY BRIDGE CLOSED 
In this scenario, the frequency and distribution of ferry service from the East Bay would need to increase. 
In addition, extra vessels, possibly larger ones, would help carry a portion of people who currently use 
either BART or the Bay Bridge. In fulfillment of its mandate, the Water Emergency Transportation 
Authority would manage the increase in existing services, including augmenting service with vessels 
brought in from other locations. 
The East Bay ferry routes (Alameda-Oakland and Harbor Bay routes) currently carry about 2,000 
passengers per day. Using all available boats in all  corridors (i.e., maximizing usage on the 
North Bay and East Bay corridors), ferries in the East Bay corridor could carry about 2,000 passengers 
per hour, regardless of the three scenarios discussed in this section.  
13   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
This means that in emergencies, ferries would be able to transport 2,000 passengers per hour  or 48,000 
passengers in 24 hours or 32,000 passengers during two eight-hour shifts. The Alameda/Oakland and 
Harbor Bay routes take approximately 30 minutes each way. Based on Water Emergency Transportation 
Authority estimates, approximately 228,000 people would need to get back to the East Bay from San 
Francisco after a major disaster that would disrupt both the Transbay Tube and the Bay Bridge. It would 
take approximately 114 hours to evacuate 228,000 people if WETA maxed out on both of these East Bay 
routes.14 
What can be done to augment ferry service in response to a major emergency? The limiting factor for 
increasing ferry service is not the number of vessels, but instead the number, location and type of landings 
and terminals suitable for ferry service. WETA could double East Bay service capacity to 4,000 
passengers per hour if one additional terminal were added at the San Francisco ferry terminal. This would 
allow WETA to use the three terminals in the east bay (Jack London Square in Oakland, Main Street in 
Alameda and Harbor Bay in Alameda) to their maximum capacities.  
Relatively few vessels suitable for ferry service are available from outside the region. A few high-speed 
vessels could come from Southern California (Catalina and Channel Islands ferries), as well as some 
military air-cushion vessels (hovercraft). The only automobile ferries in the western United States are 
those operated by the State of Washington. However, these are in short supply and require dedicated 
landing facilities, so WETA cannot realistically rely on that option. 
The suitability of vessels for emergency ferry service is a function of their design. Most of the Bay is 
quite shallow, and routes to potential emergency ferry terminal locations may be navigable only at high 
tides. Vessels serving terminals outside the central Bay must therefore be of shallow draught (the depth 
that the vessel projects below the waterline). Furthermore, a vessels freeboard (the height of the deck 
above the waterline) must be compatible with the landing and passenger boarding structures. Similarly, 
vessels designed for boarding over both bow and stern, or strictly from alongside, may not be compatible 
with existing and emergency ferry terminals. Certain landings and routes may only be compatible with 
reversible, double-ended ferries, while others may be compatible only with conventional single-ended 
vessels. 
If both the Transbay Tube and the Bay Bridge are closed, WETA will be able to provide sufficient 
transportation evacuation for the commuters and visitors stranded either in San Francisco or in East or 
North Bay (Vallejo). WETA will also be able to become a key transit link between San Francisco and 
East Bay by adding additional vessels and by increasing frequency of ferry service. However ferries will 
not be able to meet the total demand for trips in the months and years following a major disaster. One of 
the key deterrents for the ferry service augmentation could become the limited number of ferry terminals 
in San Francisco and the unsuitability of these ferry terminals to certain type of vessels.  
 
EAST BAY / TRANSBAY LINK: SOLUTIONS BY TIMEFRAME  
Action Item Responsible 
Agencies 
BEFORE THE DISASTER: PLANNING 
Create a plan to coordinate bus bridges across the Bay Bridge in the event AC Transit, BART 
BART service is disrupted. Such a plan would include routing, stops and and Caltrans 
schedules of new bus lines created for an emergency event. 
Create permanent bus-only lanes on approaching freeways to the Bay Bridge Caltrans and AC 
(I-80, I-580 and I-880). Consider contraflow lanes on these freeways, in Transit 
addition to the Bay Bridge. 
14   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
Develop a restricted vehicle plan. Identify the locations of the HOV system Caltrans 
where occupancy limits would be increased, along with pre-designation of 
dedicated bus access ramps on the freeway and bridge access system. Pre-
printed signs should be fabricated and stored. 
Develop contraflow bus system, including a morning-only westbound Caltrans, MTC and 
contraflow lane to improve bus access into San Francisco. This system would the  Toll 
be vital during a BART emergency. Authority.  
Identify emergency park-and-ride locations, and have maps and draft websites MTC and local 
available for their dissemination. government  
Develop emergency transit plans. Agencies should develop plans for Bay MTC, BART and 
Bridge failure which assign trains and buses to their most productive use. Plans AC Transit 
should be coordinated across agencies. 
Establish an emergency reserve fleet. About 100 buses should be maintained in AC Transit 
the East Bay. 
Establish mutual aid agreements with other bus agencies. The  should AC Transit, MTC 
enter into mutual aid agreements with other agencies to ensure that 100 buses 
can be quickly requisitioned, along with drivers from other operators. 
Complete BART system improvements. BART is pursuing several capital BART 
improvement projects that would be of benefit after a disaster since they 
increase capacity within the system core. These include three-door cars that 
allow passengers to board faster and reduce the time trains spend in the 
stations. In addition, BART should begin the process of adding side platforms 
at critical center platform stations, such as Embarcadero and Montgomery. 
Ensure ferry vessel/terminal compatibility. Compile and maintain a register of Water Emergency 
existing and potential emergency ferry terminals, their characteristics and the Transportation 
requirements for vessels that would serve them after an emergency. Authority 
Identify critical docks and piers throughout the  that could be used WETA 
after an earthquake. Develop a plan to create the necessary contingency 
infrastructure and procedures. 
Develop a strategy for critical goods movement in both the response and WETA 
recovery periods to ensure that food, water and construction materials can be 
delivered as required. 
AFTER THE DISASTER: MANAGING THE MID-TERM 
Implement Bay Bridge restricted vehicle plan Caltrans, MTC 
Implement bus bridging in the event of a BART shutdown. Bus bridging uses BART, AC Transit 
buses to fill in a gap in rail service or highway facilities. As an example, if 
BART has a disabled train at Lake Merritt, buses can be used to transfer 
passengers between Fruitvale and 12th Street. 
Create contraflow bus lanes on Bay Bridge Caltrans, AC 
Transit, MTC 
Create bus only lanes on Bay Bridge and on approaching freeways. Caltrans, AC 
Transit, MTC 
Require all BART cars running into and out of San Francisco to be at full BART 
capacitythis would require significant management of the BART platforms 
15   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
at strategic locations. 
Implement mutual aid actions MTC, AC Transit 
Utilize excursion boats to enhance ferry service. WETA 
ONGOING (LONG-TERM): PROJECTS THAT CREATE REDUNDANCY 
A second transbay tube would create a critical redundancy in the rail network BART to lead, in 
between Oakland and San Francisco. Although this project would take years of consultation with 
planning and require a major financial investment, it would also ensure the Muni, AC Transit 
region's economic viability in the event of a disaster. In addition, Caltrain and and cities that would 
high-speed rail should be extended under the Bay to Oakland. A new tunnel receive new BART 
would be built to current seismic standards, and it would provide increased service. 
capacity to the transportation system. 
 
2. SOUTH BAY/PENINSULA  BART, CALTRAIN, I-280 AND HIGHWAY 
101 FREEWAYS 
Of the corridors serving San Francisco, this is among those with the greatest redundancy. Because there 
are multiple links from the South Bay to San Francisco, if one or two of the links are disrupted, there are 
other links that can allow continuous access to San Francisco. The key links are two freeways  Highway 
101/Bayshore Freeway and I-280/Junipero Serra Freeway  and the Caltrain and BART rail lines. There 
are also several main street connections: Bayshore Boulevard, Geneva Avenue, Mission Street, Junipero 
Serra Boulevard, Lake Merced Boulevard and Skyline Boulevard.  
 examined two scenarios for an earthquake affecting this corridor:  
A. CALTRAIN AND BART INTACT, BOTH FREEWAYS CLOSED 
Under this scenario, neither of the two freeways from the South Bay  U.S. Highway 101 and I-280  
would be able provide access into San Francisco from south of the city. The two highways current 
demand of about 330,000 daily vehicular trips (192,000 for Highway 101 and 138,000 for I-280), or 
about 390,000 person trips,15 could not simply transfer to Caltrain or BART. About 29,20016 of those trips 
taken by people in cars are in the peak hour (from roughly 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.) In addition there are 
about 800 people taking the bus into San Francisco in the peak hour. 
We assume that with work shift changes, about two-thirds of the 29,900 trips taken by people in private 
cars and 800 bus passenger trips would be accommodated in the peak hour, or about 20,700 additional rail 
passengers per hour.17 
While the many commuters travel from the South Bay to jobs in San Francisco, many, if not more, 
commute from San Francisco to work in San Mateo and Santa Clara counties. In fact, many technology 
companies offer free shuttle bus service from San Francisco to Silicon Valley so their employees can get 
to work without driving in the traffic. In the event of a major earthquake, if one or both freeways to the 
South Bay were disrupted, then many residents in San Francisco would either switch to driving street 
highways such as El Camino Real or commuting during off-peak hours. 
A number of tools could help minimize the effect of freeway disruptions in this corridor:  
 Adapted and Enhanced Caltrain and BART Service. Adding train cars would be the principal 
way to increase capacity, especially for Caltrain. In addition, timed transfers between BART and 
Caltrain at Millbrae Station would also facilitate the increased demand.  
 Make Operational improvements to improve system performance and add rail capacity 
Caltrain service other than the Baby Bullet trains would be restricted to limited service between 
16   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
San Mateo and San Jose. Trains would not make stops at 22nd Street, Bayshore, South San 
Francisco, San Bruno and Burlingame. Running Baby Bullets to and from San Francisco, 
Millbrae, San Mateo and other Baby Bullet stations would add capacity. In addition to the 
existing two BART trains to San Francisco International Airport and Millbrae, the Green and 
Blue lines would be temporarily extended to Millbrae  
 Additional Bus Service: With some Caltrain stations not receiving service, bus service between 
closed stations and Baby Bullet stations should be implemented.  
 Park and Ride Locations: In addition to using Caltrain and BART stations, cities would need to 
provide locations such as shopping centers and fairgrounds to use as park and ride areas for 
feeder buses to Caltrain stations.  
 HOV Restrictions: Caltrans should increase all HOV occupancy requirements to not less than 
four per vehicle on open sections of Highway 101 and I-280. 
 Make use of the old Highway Network: Manage auto demand by utilizing El Camino Real, 
Alemany Boulevard and Bayshore Boulevard  
B. ONE OR BOTH FREEWAYS INTACT, CALTRAIN AND BART CLOSED 
Under this scenario, neither Caltrain nor BART would be able to operate into San Francisco from south of 
the City. This would affect about 40,000 BART trips into and out of San Francisco, and about 15,000 
Caltrain trips. 
About 3,100 BART trips are taken in the peak hour and about 2,300 Caltrain trips occur in the peak hour, 
for a total of about 5,500 peak hour transit trips. We assume that with work shift changes, about two-
thirds of the 5,500 would be accommodated in the peak hour, or about 4,000 additional bus passengers 
per hour.18 The impact of rail-service disruptions could be mitigated in several ways: 
 Additional Bus Service: An additional 4,000 hourly bus passengers would require about 100 
additional buses (assuming that most buses could do a round trip in 90 minutes from the 
Peninsula), in addition to the dozen buses currently scheduled. The new Transbay Transit Center 
will accommodate this demand. 
 Peninsula Park and Ride Locations: In addition to using Caltrain and BART stations, cities 
would need to provide additional locations as park and ride areas for express buses operating into 
San Francisco. 
 HOV Restrictions: Caltrans could increase all HOV occupancy requirements to not less than 
four per vehicle to ensure that express buses can operate effectively. In addition, meter facilities 
should allow only vehicles with at least four passengers to bypass them. 
SOUTH BAY: STRATEGIES BY TIME FRAME  
Action Item Responsible 
Agencies 
BEFORE THE DISASTER: PLANNING 
Establish plan for managing roadway capacity in the event of an emergency. BART, Caltrans 
Coordinate between agencies to plan for bus bridges and park-and-ride 
facilities. Create plans for emergency services in case of disaster, especially if 
freeways are disrupted. 
Strengthen and retrofit Caltrain tracks as necessary and tunnels on the Caltrain 
17   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
peninsula and within San Francisco. 
Develop a restricted vehicle plan. Identify the locations of the HOV system Caltrans 
where occupancy limits would be increased, along with pre-designation of 
dedicated bus access ramps on the freeway and bridge access system. Pre-
printed signs should be fabricated and stored. 
Develop emergency park and ride locations. Identify various emergency park MTC, local 
and ride locations and have maps and draft websites available for their governments 
dissemination. 
Establish an emergency reserve bus fleet. Should BART and Caltrain fail, at Caltrain, Santa Clara 
least 100 additional buses would be required in Peninsula service. Build a Valley Transportation 
reserve fleet of about 50 buses, located in San Mateo and northern Santa Authority 
Clara Counties. Additionally, create a locomotive and passenger car fleet. 
Due to the higher cost of purchasing and storing rail cars, a very small fleet is 
recommended. 
Enter into mutual aid agreements with other bus agencies to ensure that the VTA, MTC 
other 50 buses required for service can be quickly requisitioned, along with 
drivers from other operators. In addition, agreements with rail providers (e.g. 
Amtrak, Metrolink, ACE) would ensure that additional rail cars could also be 
requisitioned quickly. 
AFTER THE DISASTER: MANAGING THE MID-TERM 
Create bus bridges to manage roads with carpool lanes, bus prioritization and Caltrans, VTA 
park and rides. 
Allow for transit-only lanes on Highway 101 and I-280. Caltrans 
Employ old highway system, by making use of El Camino Real, Alemany Caltrans, MTC, local 
and Bayshore. government 
Require carpooling for private automobiles Caltrans 
Require Caltrain and BART cars to be full. Caltrain, BART 
Use diesel locomotives on Caltrain lines if electricity is down. Caltrain 
Require valet parking at lots and garages. If existing parking facilities have Local government 
assisted parking (aka valet parking), more cars can be parked. 
ONGOING (LONG-TERM): PROJECTS THAT CREATE REDUNDANCY 
Complete the California high-speed rail project. California High 
Speed Rail Authority 
Electrify Caltrain. Caltrain 
Expand Caltrain to a four-track, completely grade-separated system Caltrain 
18   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
3. NORTH BAY  GOLDEN GATE BRIDGE, FERRIES 
Although the Golden Gate Bridge and North Bay ferries accommodate only moderate traffic to San 
Francisco in comparison with the Bay Bridge and BART, these links are very vulnerable. The Golden 
Gate Bridge, with one deck of six narrow lanes, provides the only road access between the North Bay and 
San Francisco. There is no rail access, and ferries from multiple cities provide the only other access. Due 
to ferries limited service levels and vessel sizes, ferries provide only a small portion of the access to San 
Francisco from the North Bay. 
There is one North Bay scenario: 
A. FERRY TERMINALS INTACT, GOLDEN GATE BRIDGE CLOSED 
There are several factors to consider in this scenario. For example, the Golden Gate Bridge itself may 
survive, but its approaches may be damaged due to liquefaction, landslides or other ground subsidence. In 
such a situation, some transit vehicles would use the bridge, but no other access would be provided. Ferry 
landings also could be damaged. Ferry solutions are discussed in more detail for all scenarios later. 
In this scenario we assume that both the Richmond-San Rafael Bridge and the San Francisco-Oakland 
Bay Bridge survive, as do the ferry landings. The Golden Gate Bridges current demand of about 118,000 
daily vehicular trips (about 141,500 person trips19) would be unable to use the bridge. About 10,000 of 
these vehicular trips are in the peak hour (approximately 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.). In addition, about 1,400 
peak-hour bus passengers would be affected. Under this scenario, commuters (both auto and transit) 
would be diverted to ferries and the Richmond-San Rafael Bridge. We assume that with work-shift 
changes, about two thirds of the 10,000 would be accommodated in the peak hour by a combination of 
bus and ferry service, or about 6,700 additional bus and ferry passengers per hour.20 
Golden Gate Ferry services typically carry 3,500 passengers per day, and Vallejo Baylink 1,500 per day. 
In an emergency, Golden Gate Ferry could carry about 2,300 passengers per hour and Vallejo Baylink 
could carry about 600 passengers per hour, for a total of 2,900 passengers per hour for the North Bay 
corridor. 
The Golden Gate Ferry Lark service takes 30 minutes and the Sausalito service 25 minutes one-way 
between those terminals and San Francisco21. The Water Emergency Transportation Authority estimates 
that 75,000 people will need to return to Marin County from San Francisco after a disaster. With 
increased, emergency ferry service, it would take as long as 33 hours to carry those people to Marin 
County. The Vallejo Baylink service takes 60 minutes one way. WETA estimates that 22,000 people 
would need to return from San Francisco to Solano County, which means that emergency ferry service 
would need as long as 37 hours to get these people back to Vallejo.22
 
Although ferry capacity would be increased, not all of the demand could be met through ferries. Due to 
the need for more than ferries, we assume rerouted buses would carry at least 75 percent of the 6,700 
commuters via the Richmond-San Rafael Bridge, or about 5,000 additional bus passengers per hour.  
While there are plans to improve the ferry fleet, if an earthquake or other disaster occurs before those 
projects are completed, the Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District will need to 
concentrate its bus and ferry resources effectively. It has a number of tools it could use to meet the 
demand: 
 Additional bus service: An additional 5,000 hourly bus passengers would require about 150 
additional buses (assuming that most buses could do a round trip in one and a half hours from 
Marin County to El Cerrito Del Norte and Richmond BART Stations), in addition to the two 
buses currently scheduled. The two BART stations would have to be temporarily redesigned to 
accommodate the higher demand. If the Bay Bridge were open, some buses could take the full 
journey to San Francisco, although such a route would require more buses due to the longer trip 
19   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
time. 
 Richmond-San Rafael Bridge use restrictions: Similar to the requirements recommended 
earlier for the Bay Bridge, the bridge should be restricted to occupancy of not less than four per 
vehicle. In addition, the wide shoulder lanes should be made into contraflow lanes for buses on 
both decks.  
 Marin and Sonoma park-and-ride locations: Cities would need to provide additional locations 
as park and ride areas for express buses operating over the Richmond-San Rafael Bridge. 
NORTH BAY LINK: SOLUTIONS BY TIME FRAME  
Action Item Responsible 
Agencies 
BEFORE THE DISASTER: PLANNING 
Develop a restricted vehicle plan. Identify the locations of the HOV system Caltrans 
where occupancy limits would be increased and identify locations that could be 
designated dedicated bus access ramps on the freeway and bridge access 
system. Signs should be fabricated and stored. 
Develop emergency park-and-ride locations. Identify various emergency park-MTC, local 
and-ride locations and have maps and draft websites available for their governments  
dissemination. 
Establish an emergency reserve fleet. Should the Golden Gate Bridge fail, at Golden Gate 
least 150 additional buses would be required in service (due to using the Transit 
Richmond Bridge and additional feeder services to the Lark Ferry). This 
will require several acres of parking, probably by expanding existing Golden 
Gate Transit bus yards in Marin. 
Establish mutual aid agreements with other bus agencies. Enter into mutual aid Golden Gate 
agreements with other agencies to ensure that the additional buses required for Transit, MTC 
service can be quickly requisitioned, along with drivers from other operators. 
Develop a contraflow bus system. Caltrans, along with the Metropolitan MTC, BATA 
Transportation Commission and the  Toll Authority, should develop 
emergency-only Bay Bridge and Richmond-San Rafael contraflow lanes to 
improve bus access after a disaster in the event that access across the Golden 
Gate Bridge is disrupted. 
Develop emergency transit plans for Golden Gate Transit and Golden Gate Golden Gate 
Ferry, as well as BART. Each agency should develop a plan that assumes Transit, WETA, 
Golden Gate Bridge failure and assigns ferries and buses to their most BART 
productive use. Plans should be coordinated across agencies. 
Create a plan to coordinate bus bridges from Marin to San Francisco across the Golden Gate 
Richmond-San Rafael Bridge to East Bay BART stations or into San Francisco Transit, MTC 
via the Bay Bridge. Such plans would include routing, stops and schedules of 
rerouted Golden Gate Bridge bus lines created for an emergency event. 
AFTER THE DISASTER:  MANAGING THE MID-TERM 
Require carpooling for private vehicles on the Richmond-San Rafael Bridge. Caltrans, MTC 
20   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
Implement the bus bridge plan to East Bay BART stations, or into San Golden Gate 
Francisco via the Bay Bridge. Transit, BART, 
Caltrans 
Create contraflow bus lanes on both decks of the Richmond-San Rafael Bridge. Caltrans, MTC 
Increase ferry service through borrowing ferry vehicles from tour operations WETA 
and ferry operators from the West Coast. 
LONG TERM PROJECTS THAT CREATE REDUNDANCY 
Add ferry landings in appropriate locations. WETA, Local Ports 
Coordinate Sonoma Marin Area Rail Transit train service to access Lark SMART, WETA 
Landing. 
Replace Doyle Drive in San Francisco to ensure that its approach to the Golden San Francisco 
Gate Bridge functions after an earthquake. County 
Transportation 
Authority 
 HOV restrictions: Caltrans could increase all HOV occupancy requirements on Highway 101, I-
580 and I-80 to not less than four per vehicle to ensure that express buses can operate effectively.  
 Adapted ferry service: Golden Gate Ferries could dedicate its entire fleet to peak demand 
periods, while acquiring temporary use of other ferries from other ferry providers based on 
prearranged agreements. This would ensure that it has adequate equipment to meet the high 
demand on the core of the system.  
 
4. FERRIES ONLY 
If most or all major rail and highway links were disrupted, especially from the East Bay and the North 
Bay, a major upgrade in ferry service would be required. All existing and possible temporary landings 
would be employed on all shores. We would need to: 
 Radically increase ferry service (additional docks would be needed, particularly at the downtown 
San Francisco Ferry Building). 
 Add new routes of service. Some options include Richmond, Benicia and Redwood City to spread 
the passenger load to new docks along existing San Francisco to Oakland route. 
 Reroute bus lines from rail and highway networks to new ferry landings.  
 Add non- ferry boats to area. (See Section A on adding boats.) 
This section explores the possibilities and limitations of using ferries as our worst case scenario regional 
transit system following a major earthquake. 
Ferries: SOLUTIONS BY TIMEFRAME 
Action Item Responsible 
Agencies 
BEFORE THE DISASTER: PLANNING 
Inventory existing ferry fleets, commercial fleets, and ferry fleets at nearby cities WETA 
(Los Angeles, Seattle, and Vancouver), to assess whether each fleet would be able to 
21   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
adapt to current ferry landings. In the inventory, indicate a tier of different boat sizes 
and capacity. 
Establish ofcial disaster mutual aid agreements with other ferry operators so that the other WETA 
ferry providers would be ready to offer some of their ferries to relieve the city in case of a 
disaster. Nearby boat and ferry agencies should be contacted rst. Because some ferries may 
be seaworthy, cities at greater distances that would require an ocean journey for the ferry to 
reach the  also should be considered, but using ferries from some of these cities 
would present additional challenges:  
 Los Angeles 
 Seattle (nearby, but most ferries probably too big for docks in San Francisco) 
 Vancouver (nearby, but some ferries probably too big and others too small for docks 
in San Francisco) 
 In case of a catastrophic disaster in which most bridges collapse, other areas should 
be considered: New York City, Hong Kong, Sydney, Istanbul, Boston, Norway, 
Long Island Sound, Nova Scotia, Alaska 
The main challenge with ferry systems outside the  is that many of their boats are 
either too small to travel long distances to San Francisco, or are too big for San Francisco and 
other  docks. For those with larger ferries, only long-term solutions like building 
more docks could allow large ferries such as those in Vancouver, Seattle and New York to 
function in San Francisco. 
Consider preparing docks and ferry landings that could accommodate larger vessels. WETA 
Many of the San Francisco piers may be able to take a large ferry, including the 
cruise ship terminal. However, such landings may not exist on other, smaller 
properties. Consider funding the development of new terminals as long as further 
ferry fleet development is environmentally smart and economically viable. The 
Water Emergency Transportation Authority would be in charge. 
Inventory existing  landings: boat landings at marinas, ports and ramps that WETA 
could be easily adapted for ferries, should be researched and developed. Some 
landings could be adapted ahead of time, while others could be altered after a 
disaster to accommodate water taxis and larger ferry vehicles. 
AFTER THE DISASTER: MANAGING THE MID-TERM 
Increase ferry service where necessary. Caltrans, VTA 
Consider adding water taxi services where possible and economically viable. Ferry Caltrans 
landings could be added at sites that may not normally be viable for regular ferry 
services but would be critical in a disaster.  
Reroute bus services to ferry landings if many or most links are disrupted. Ferry Caltrans, MTC, 
landings will also need large parking lots nearby and shuttle service from the parking local government 
lots to the ferry landing. Such parking lots include shopping centers, racetracks, 
empty lots, parks and universities.  
 
5. INTRA SAN FRANCISCO 
A. MARKET STREET SUBWAY CLOSED 
Due to the street network and multiple rail lines from San Franciscos many neighborhoods, there are 
many redundancies. The only link that is critical and has no direct equivalent is the Market Street Subway 
for both BART and Muni Metro trains.  
22   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
Under this scenario, Munis current demand of about 75,000 daily Market Street Subway trips would be 
diverted to other modes. About 9,500 of those trips are in the peak hour (7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.). Those 
trips would be diverted onto replacement buses. We assume that with work shift changes, about two-
thirds of the 9,500 would be accommodated in the peak hour, or about 6,300 additional bus passengers 
per hour.23 If either the Twin Peaks Tunnel or the Sunset Tunnel were compromised in addition to the 
Market Street Subway, all light rail service would be converted to bus service. If only the Market Street 
Subway were compromised then most, if not all, Metro service could move to the surface of Market 
Street. The tools to use to meet this demand include: 
 Reroute Muni Metro Service to Surface of Market Street: If the Munis Market Street Subway 
is not usable, it is possible for the light rail vehicles manufactured by Breda to operate on the 
surface of Market Street. The Breda cars use a pantograph (a device which maintains electrical 
contact with Munis overhead electrical wires) to collect power and transfer it to the Muni car.  
The trolley coaches that run on Market use a different system, with both positive and negative 
wires. It is possible to rebuild Munis overhead wires to accommodate the Breda cars, but a less 
expensive and time consuming approach is to outfit all the Bredas with trolley poles so they can 
use the wires on Market Street. A reasonable scenario would be to wire the cars to be easily 
modified and have the poles stored on-site at Muni for an emergency adaptation. 
 Additional Bus Service: An additional 6,300 hourly bus passengers would require about 250 
additional buses (assuming that most buses could do a round trip in one hour from the western 
and southern parts of San Francisco), in addition to the many buses currently scheduled.  
 Transit Only Market Street. Market Street already supports many bus routes and a bus lane 
along much of its length. In the event of a disaster, Muni and the City of San Francisco should 
plan for Market Street to be closed to general traffic between points where transit is critical. 
 Increase BART service in San Francisco: If electric buses and roads are incapacitated, a 
functioning BART should increase service. 
 Employ Diesel and Hybrid Buses on Electric Bus Routes. Have a plan to deploy diesel buses 
to the highest ridership electric bus routes if they are incapacitated. 
SAN FRANCISCO: SOLUTIONS BY TIMEFRAME  
Action Item Responsible 
Agencies 
BEFORE THE DISASTER: PLANNING 
Complete a performance audit of Muni facilities (yards, stations) and identify MTA 
deficiencies and retrofit as required. Ensure that facilities will be operable within two 
days. 
Replace Muni's central control facility, ensuring that it performs as an essential MTA 
facility. 
Retrofit Forest Hills Muni Metro station MTA 
Develop a plan for deploying diesel and hybrid buses on incapacitated electric bus MTA 
routes. Make routes with the highest ridership the highest priority. 
Enact mutual aid agreements for buses and bus service with other transit agencies. MTA 
23   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
Develop program and stockpile materials to allow Muni Metro light rail vehicles to MTA 
operate on the surface if the Market Street subway tunnel is damaged. 
Establish an emergency reserve fleet. Should Muni's electrical transit system fail, at MTA 
least 200 additional buses would be required to partially compensate for the almost 
400 trolley coaches and nearly 200 light-rail vehicles. While Muni has maintained a 
small reserve fleet for minor events, it is not sufficient. On the other hand, it would 
be unwise to simply store 200 old buses for possible use. They need to be 
maintained, occasionally cleaned and garaged. However, in conjunction with other 
reserve fleets (such as the East Bay fleet) Muni should maintain a reserve fleet of 
about 100 buses, located in San Francisco. This will require a total of about three 
acres of parking, which could require the expansion of an existing or planned Muni 
diesel yard. 
Plan for bicycle transportation as part of the immediate, medium and long-term MTA 
recovery period. 
AFTER THE DISASTER: MANAGING THE MID-TERM 
Activate reserve fleet as necessary. MTA 
Deploy diesel buses on incapacitated electric bus routes. MTA 
Run Muni light rail vehicles on Market Street surfacelikely would require MTA 
temporary retrofit of LRVs with trolley poles. 
Create temporary transit-only streets to allow for more high volume usage. MTA 
Ensure that the bicycle network is usable during recovery period and that the MTA 
network is enhanced and expanded as part of long-term recovery. 
ONGOING (LONG-TERM): PROJECTS THAT CREATE REDUNDANCY 
Build San Francisco's Bus Rapid Transit Network, including Bus Rapid Transit lines SFCTA, MTA 
on Geary and Van Ness.  
Complete Transbay Terminal. Transbay Joint 
Powers Authority 
Build out the Bicycle Network MTA 
Build a new BART line serving San Francisco to ensure redundancy after a disaster. BART 
24   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
BICYCLES AND DISASTER RECOVERY  
Bicycles can play a key role in disaster response and recovery. Bicycles need little road/path 
infrastructure to travel efficiently, are very flexible, can carry substantial loads and do not require fuel for 
operation. Since the advent of Kevlar and comparable belting materials, flat tires are very rare. Given 
that bicycles are slow relative to transit or auto travel, their use is generally limited to a radius of less 
than 10 miles. 
After a disaster, bicycles offer efficient transportation alternatives when other options may be 
unavailable. Bicycles can be used by engineers and inspectors performing building triage for tagging 
damaged buildings and transportation infrastructure, for personal use by residents for commuting, and as 
an option for evacuation post earthquake, given the limited likely road and rail alternatives available to 
the nearly one million people in the city during a peak period in the day.  
Although only a small segment of the population ride bikes for utility purposes, there is anecdotal 
evidence that San Francisco could have several hundreds of thousands of bicycles, kept in garages, 
sheds, and storage facilities. However, many are neglected and are not street-worthy.  There are 
additional tens of thousands in the inventory of the citys many bike shops and rental companies. 
Our plans for immediate response to a disaster should include the creation of a Bicycle Emergency 
Response Team, made up of volunteers and paid professionals who can be reached and activated, much 
like a NERT team. With 11,000 members, the San Francisco Bicycle Coalition, plus other local 
coalitions and clubs in the  could help this team.  
Other elements of a bicycle response plan should include: 
 Shared Bikes for short-term check-in-check-out, tracked via existing open source systems. 
 Below Market Rate Bikes for longer-term use during the disaster-recovery period, sold for 
highly discounted rates. 
 Loaner bikes at no cost, but with registration and agreement for return after the disaster. These 
bikes will require discounted purchase of a U-lock, and have locking skewers to prevent wheel 
removal built-in. 
 Key locations storage for bicycle pickup and check in. 
 Use of volunteers and professionals to pick up donated and low-end purchase, to sell/lease/lend/, 
provide valet services modeled on the system used at AT&T Park, perform triage services in 
sorting donations/purchases for classification, and tune-up teams. 
 Media plan for calling for bike donation/delivery to bicycle stations 
 Communication and inventory tracking system for people and bicycles. 
 
III. ADDITIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS  
 has three recommendations not specific to any corridor that would enable San Francisco and its 
associated transportation systems recover quickly and effectively from a disaster.  
1. Develop a recovery organization for the San Francisco . 
2. Complete a performance audit of our existing transportation infrastructure. 
3. Engage in hazard mitigation strategies that shore up our existing transit infrastructure and add 
redundancy on our core transportation lines. 
25   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
Recommendation #1: Do a gap analysis to determine what types of authority should be housed 
within a recovery organization for the San Francisco , focused specically on 
transportation. 
No single entity, task force or organization in the San Francisco  is responsible for the regions 
recovery after a disaster. The Metropolitan Transportation Commission, in coordination with the 
Association of  Governments, needs to assess the need for the creation a transportation recovery 
entity that will function as the s command center for transportation. Specifically, the MTC 
should determine what powers a regional recovery organization would need to facilitate coordination 
among the various transit operators and to help balance competing priorities. The MTC should conduct 
this analysis through its Transit Sustainability program.  
In the short term, ABAG and the MTC should convene a group of high level public and private 
stakeholders to focus specifically on transportation recovery planning. This group should define plans and 
criteria for recovery before an event, and may be positioned to begin recovery very soon after the event. 
The group should study and form plans take action in a number of key areas: 
 Organizational form, structure, roles and responsibilities of a recovery authority after a 
catastrophe 
 Criteria and processes for transition from response to recovery 
 Criteria for determining and setting priorities for investments in restoration, removal or improved 
rebuilding of damaged transportation facilities 
 Features, facilities and services that are preferred for investment in restoration or rebuilding 
differently 
 Desirable alternative states of transportation infrastructure, service and administration 
 Reconfiguration of transportation infrastructure in response to observed damage after earthquake 
 Compiling knowledge of best practices throughout the world for recovery and restoration of 
transportation systems 
It addition to defining the criteria and processes for restoring and rebuilding transportation infrastructure, 
this group could also develop scenarios assuming various types, distributions and levels of severity of 
catastrophic events, and could use these scenarios as case studies for planning and executing the recovery 
and rebuilding of transportation systems. 
Recommendation #2: Complete a performance audit of our existing transportation infrastructure.  
s work on lifelines as part of its Before the Disaster efforts revealed that, for the most 
part, we dont know how our lifelines will perform during a disaster. We recommended that a 
lifelines audit be conducted, using the performance during both the expected and the 
extreme earthquakes as standards. Information on the extreme event is needed for immediate 
response planning, and information on the performance under the expected event is need for non-
critical transportation infrastructure that will be needed during the recover phase. This 
recommendation should be extended to the s transportation systems. The MTC should 
assess the performance of our existing transportation infrastructure, and report its findings within 
a year.  
 
PERFORMANCE CATEGORIES FOR LIFELINES 
 
Category I Resume 100 percent of service levels within four hours 
Critical response facilities  including fire stations, hospitals, and facilities used for evacuation  need 
26   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
to be supported by transportation systems critical to their operation. This level of performance assures that 
these facilities will be available within four hours of the disaster. It requires streets and roads that provide 
access to critical facilities and waterfront and airport facilities used for evacuations to resist significant 
damage; provisions for removing debris and making immediate repairs as needed; and establishment of 
alternative routes that allow troubled spots to be avoided.  
 
Category II  Resume 90 percent service within 72 hours, 95 percent within 30 days, 100 percent 
within four months 
 
Residential neighborhoods and key commercial areas require that transportation systems be restored 
quickly so that these areas can be brought back to livable conditions. This category includes the Bay 
Bridge and Golden Gate Bridge, which should be re-opened to traffic immediately after post-earthquake 
inspections are complete; the main arteries of the US 101, I-80, and I-280 freeways, as well as key on- 
and off-ramps; the BART transbay tube and San Mateo County line; key MUNI lines; and facilities 
required for MUNI operation and maintenance.  While this level of performance allows for repairs to 
lightly damaged facilities or establishment of temporary facilities and systems, these systems need to have 
a higher level of resilience and redundancy than the systems that support the rest of the city. 
 
Category III Resume 90 percent service within 72 hours, 95 percent within 30 days, 100 percent 
within three years 
The balance of the city needs to have its systems restored as buildings are repaired or replaced and 
returned to operation. There is time to repair and replace facilities with major damage and to replace older 
vulnerable systems with new systems. This category includes restoration of full service at the airport, all 
MUNI lines, Caltrain, all ferries and other waterborne transportation, all freeway on- and off-ramps, and 
less-traveled streets.  Temporary systems can be installed as needed while long-term repair/replacement 
projects are completed. Most existing transportation systems will qualify for Category III performance. 
Recommendation #3: Engage in hazard mitigation strategies that shore up our existing transit 
infrastructure and add redundancy on our core transportation lines 
Some links are more important than others. Some links carry more traffic, or have more capacity, 
or have a higher risk of failing in an earthquake. How should we determine which projects are 
the most important to complete now  before the disaster  to help facilitate a rapid recovery 
after the disaster?  believes that several hazard mitigation strategies are the most important 
to pursue: 
 Complete ongoing or planned retrofits of regional systems, including Bay crossings, other 
freeway bridges and important links (e.g. the replacement of Doyle Drive), and the BART 
retrofit program 
 Retrofit existing piers that are or can be used for ferry landings, and establish additional ferry 
landing sites 
 Increase the resilience of fuel storage and distribution systems to promote rapid restoration of 
the fuel supply for transit providers, businesses and commuters 
 Increase the resilience of facilities that support mass transportation (such as power supplies 
and maintenance facilities) 
27   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
APPENDIX I: COORDINATION WITH OTHER REGIONAL LEVEL 
TRANSPORTATION EMERGENCY PLANS 
SAN FRANCISCO  TRANSIT OPERATORS MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT  
The 10 largest  transit operators have entered into a mutual aid agreement to streamline the 
provision of voluntary mutual assistance among those operators to help ensure that public transportation 
services continue during emergencies to the maximum practical extent. This agreement facilitates 
multijurisdictional transit response during an emergency, if such a response is necessary. The following 
organizations are part of the mutual aid agreement: 
 Alameda  Contra Costa Transit District 
 Altamont Commuter Express Rail 
 San Francisco  Rapid Transit District 
 Contra Costa County Transportation Authority 
 Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District 
 Livermore-Amador Valley Transit Authority 
 San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency 
 San Mateo County Transit District 
 Santa Clara County Transit District 
 City of Vallejo 
Assistance generally will be in the form of resources, such as equipment, supplies and personnel. 
Assistance will be given only when the lender determines that its own needs can be met before releasing 
its resources in support of the agreement.  
The agreement provides necessary tools for the regional transit agencies to cooperate in an emergency 
and share resources and personnel. During a major catastrophic incident, most of these transit agencies 
would be severely affected, and aid from outside of the region would be necessary. The agreement is 
more useful for a smaller-scale local incident, which would not affect the entire San Francisco  
region. 
SAN FRANCISCO  REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION EMERGENCY 
MANAGEMENT PLAN  
The Metropolitan Transportation Commission developed and maintains the San Francisco  
Regional Transportation Emergency Management Plan, the purpose of which is to improve the ability of 
 public transportation agencies to resume operations and deliver basic transportation services 
after a significant regional disaster. The Regional Transportation Emergency Management Plan is 
intended to provide guidance to the MTC, the California Department of Transportation and the largest 
 transit operators for coordinating response and recovery efforts, and for allocating assets to 
restore basic regional mobility.  
The RTEMP is a regional plan and is not specific to San Francisco. It covers the nine San Francisco Bay 
Area counties under the jurisdiction of the MTC. This can be regarded as both a strength and weakness. 
For example, the RTEMP is not an operational document, but rather an emergency management 
document. One of the key strengths of the RTEMP is that it is linked to the SF  Transit 
Operators Mutual Aid Agreement through the MTCs Trans Response Plan, which translates to greater 
degree of collaboration among regional transportation entities24.  
28   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
SAN FRANCISCO  REGIONAL EMERGENCY COORDINATION PLAN 
The Regional Emergency Coordination Plan25 was prepared for the California Emergency Management 
Agency, Coastal Region. It comprises a base plan and nine subsidiary plans that address specific 
disciplines and operational activities, such as care and shelter, hazardous waste, fire and rescue, 
transportation, and recovery. The RECP provides a framework for collaboration among responsible 
entities and for coordination during emergencies in the . The RECP also defines procedures for 
regional coordination, collaboration and resource sharing among  emergency response agencies. 
The RECP Recovery Subsidiary Plan provides the necessary framework around which to formulate 
regional mechanisms for the recovery of transportation infrastructure.  
One of the imperative issues for the planning process is to designate a Transportation Recovery Task 
Force that would essentially coordinate the recovery effort after a major earthquake. The RECP Recovery 
Subsidiary Plan describes such a process whereby the governor would convene a Regional Recovery Task 
Force. This task force would engage representatives from the local government, private organizations, and 
government or nonprofit agencies active in recovery operations. The task force would incorporate the 
rebuilding plans of individual interests as well as larger regional restoration plans defined or mandated by 
public policy into a long range recovery vision. The City of San Franciscos involvement in such a task 
force would ensure that the state makes decisions that promote the recovery not just of the region, but also 
of San Francisco. According to the RECP Regional Recovery Plan, additional functions and structures are 
defined for the task force: 
 Provide a community leadership forum for recovery issues that are regional in scope 
 Encourage and oversee appropriate planning and analysis in support of recovery 
 Develop regional solutions to issues involving multiple jurisdictions and counties 
 Facilitate the establishment of priorities for activities if there is competition for recovery 
resources 
 Represent the regions interests in discussions with the state and federal governments, particularly 
with regard to long term recovery planning under Emergency Support Function 14 (defined by 
Federal Emergency Management Agency) and disaster-specific initiatives at the state and federal 
levels 
 Efficiently applies state and federal resources to regional recovery issues 
Working groups may be established to manage regional issues associated with specific recovery issues. 
These working groups may include a number of topics and participants: 
 Debris management  Integrated Waste Management Board, local public works departments, 
local waste management authorities and the California Environmental Protection Agency 
 Transportation  local transportation agencies, the Metropolitan Transportation Commission and 
Caltrans 
 Housing  local housing authorities and community development departments, the California 
Department of Housing and Community Development, private real estate firms and local 
planning organizations 
Similar to the RTEMP, the RECP and its nine subsidiary plans are Cal EMA (California Emergency 
Management Agency) regional-level documents and not specific to San Francisco. Furthermore, the 
RECP does not incorporate the San Francisco  Transit Operators Mutual Aid Agreement. 
 
 
29   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
AFTER THE DISASTER: REBUILDING OUR TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
                                                                                                                                                                           
1 George Cooper Pardee papers: Speeches & Articles: "California, with over one hundred..." 
http://content.cdlib.org/xtf/view?docId=hb4f59n907&query=percent%20destroyed&brand=eqf 
2 George Cooper Pardee papers: Speeches & Articles: "California, with over one 
hundred..."http://content.cdlib.org/xtf/view?docId=hb4f59n907&query=percent%20destroyed&brand=eqf 
3 The Hayward Fault is also regarded as more dangerous due to the likelihood of the next major earthquake occurring on that fault. The 
Working Group on California Earthquake Probabilities has estimated there is 31 percent probability that a magnitude 6.7 or greater earthquake 
will occur on the Hayward Fault in the next 30 years. Working Group on California Earthquake Probabilities, 2007. Uniform California 
Earthquake Rupture Forecast, Version 2. United States Geological Survey Open File Report 2007-1437. 
4 Risk Management Solutions, Inc. 2008. 1868 Hayward Earthquake: 140-Year Retrospective. RMS Special Report. 
5 BART Quarterly Daily Station Exits (October  December 2009) http://bart.gov/docs/Quarterly_Exits_Q22010.pdf  
6 Metropolitan Transportation Commission, San Francisco Central Business District Analysis, Table 1: Total Employment in Downtown 
San Francisco 1980-2035 based on ABAG Projections 2000, 2005, 2007, June 2007 
7  Metropolitan Transportation Commission, San Francisco Central Business District Analysis, Table 1: Total Employment in Downtown 
San Francisco 1980-2035 based on ABAG Projections 2000, 2005, 2007, June 2007 
8  Caltrain Downtown Extension and Transbay Ridership Analysis prepared by Cambridge Systematics, Inc. for the Transbay Joint Powers 
Authority. Final Report, November 2008. Data derived from both draft and final reports. Additional analysis prepared by Cambridge Systematics, 
Inc and Arup.  
9  Ibid. 
10  Metropolitan Transportation Commission, San Francisco Central Business District Analysis 
Travel_Forecast_Data_Summary_Jan2005.xls;June 2007 
11 BARTs Earthquake Safety Program is scheduled for completion in 2014, while the Transbay Tube seismic work will be finished in 2011. 
http://www.bart.gov/about/projects/eqs/updates.aspx 
http://www.bart.gov/docs/eqs/ESP%20General%20Presentation.pdf, accessed June 15th, 2010 
12  Caltrain Downtown Extension and Transbay Ridership Analysis prepared by Cambridge Systematics, Inc. for the Transbay Joint Powers 
Authority. Final Report, November 2008 and Transbay Ridership Analysis: Draft Report prepared for Alameda-Contra Costa Transit, Transbay 
Joint Powers Authority, Metropolitan Transportation Commission, San Francisco Water Transit Authority, August 2007.  Data derived from both 
draft and final reports. Aditional analysis prepared by Cambridge Systematics, Inc and Arup.  
13  Ibid. 
14  Email correspondence with Lauren Duran, Administrative/Policy Analyst at Water Emergency Transportation Authority, December 16, 
2009. 
15 Person trips assumes 1.2 passengers per vehicle.  
16 Caltrans: 10,600 vehicles enter and exit San Francisco on the two freeways during the peak hour. 
17 Caltrans 2007 Traffic Volumes on California State Highways and SamTrans ridership data per conversation with Ted Yurek (May 2009) 
and SamTransSFRidershipMay2009.pdf 
18  Caltrain Downtown Extension and Transbay Ridership Analysis prepared by Cambridge Systematics, Inc. for the Transbay Joint Powers 
Authority. Final Report, November 2008 and Transbay Ridership Analysis: Draft Report prepared for Alameda-Contra Costa Transit, Transbay 
Joint Powers Authority, Metropolitan Transportation Commission, San Francisco Water Transit Authority, August 2007. Additional analysis 
prepared by Cambridge Systematics, Inc and Arup. 
19  Assumes an average of 1.2 passengers per vehicle. 
20 Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District 
21  Golden Gate Bridge, Highway and Transportation District, Golden Gate Ferry Schedules - from http://goldengateferry.org/schedules/ 
22   Email from Lauren Duran, Administrative/Policy Analyst at Water Emergency Transportation Authority, December 16, 2009 
23  Data from the San Francisco Municipal Transportation Authoritys Transit Effectiveness Project: 
http://www.sfmta.com/cms/rtep/tepdataindx.htm  (Accessed on June 16th, 2010) 
24 Trans Response Plan is the transportation plan that  transportation agencies are using for all emergencies, including evacuations. It 
was first developed in 1997, and has been tested every year since then. There has not been an actual emergency situation that has activated the 
Trans Response Plan. 
25  The full version of the plans can be accessed at the  Web site at 
http://www.oes.ca.gov/WebPage/oeswebsite.nsf/content/F39818FB706ECED68825743D00738C6A?OpenDocument 
30   |  .org  |  July 1, 2010 
REPORT              02/2013
On 
How Good Land Use Planning Can Prepare the 
for a Strong Disaster Recovery 
On  
   3 Executive Summary 
This paper is generously supported by the   
 Urban Areas Security Initiative (UASI)
  4 Introduction
The  Board of Directors reviewed, debated and adopted 
  9 Section 1  this report as ofcial policy on November 14, 2012.
  Developing a Recovery Vision
Land Use Planning and Rebuilding Task Force: 
 23 Section 2  Christopher Barkley, URS Corporation*
  Earthquake Hazards in the Jack Boatwright, U.S. Geological Survey
Dana Brechwald, Association of  Governments
34 Section 3  Ngai-Chi Chung, Degenkolb Engineers*
Mary Comerio, University of California, Berkeley
  Implementing RecoverySarah Dennis-Phillips, San Francisco Planning Department
Ilene Dick, Farella, Braun and Martel
47 Section 4  Laura Dwelley-Samant, Consultant
  FinancingCaroline Guibert, Coblentz, Patch, Duffy & Bass
Micah Hilt, Earthquake Safety Implementation Program, City and 
60 Section 5   County of San Francisco
  InformationDanielle Hutchings Mieler, Association of  Governments*
Charles Eadie, Principal Associate at Hamilton Swift Land Use*
Catherine Firpo, City of Emeryville
68 Appendix 1  Kate Gillespie, AICP*
  Plan of Action:  Recommendations Alicia Johnson, San Francisco Department of Emergency 
Management
75 Appendix 2   Laurie Johnson, Laurie Johnson Consulting | Research**
  Recovery Assessment in New Orleans Laurence Korneld, Earthquake Safety Implementation Program, 
City and County of San Francisco
Keith Knudsen, U.S. Geological Survey
78 Appendix 3   Jacinta McCann, AECOM
  Gathering the Necessary Data for  Jason Ortego, University of California
  Recovery PlanningChris Poland, Degenkolb Engineers
Catherine Reilly, Successor Agency to the San Francisco 
Redevelopment Agency
Kay Vasilyeva, San Francisco Department of Emergency 
Management
  * Subcommittee Chair
** Land Use Planning and Rebuilding Task Force Chair
 staff: 
Sarah Karlinsky 
Special thanks to those individuals who provided their time and 
expertise to support this project: Daniel Adams, Mike Buhler, Anna 
Gore, Jerry Ramiza, Mark Shorett and Michael Tymoff.
Design: EXBROOK, www.exbrook.com

654 Mission Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
tel. 415.781.8726
info@.org
2   Report / January 2013
 Report
Executive Summary 
When a major earthquake strikes the , What state and federal nancing will be available 
the region could face thousands of casualties and after an earthquake, and how should local 
hundreds of thousands of displaced households. jurisdictions plan to channel this funding to 
The lives of  residents will be enormously facilitate their recovery? 
disrupted, and it could take months to rebuild and 
reestablish essential services. What types of information does the public sector 
need to collect now in order to rebuild after 
This report deals with one crucial set of long-term a disaster, and what types of information will 
disaster recovery activities: those that focus on land businesses and residents be looking for to help 
use planning and rebuilding. Land use planning make their own rebuilding decisions?
decisions determine what gets built where and how. 
They can include everything from citywide plans To answer these questions, we have organized this 
that set the vision for growth across a community report into ve corresponding sections. Each section 
to zoning decisions that govern allowable uses provides recommendations for work that should be 
for a specic property. Land use planning also done before the next major earthquake occurs, as 
includes decisions about where not to build: We well as important steps to take after the disaster to 
may decide that certain areas should be left as open help facilitate recovery. A summary table of all our 
space because they are poorly served by existing recommendations may be found on page 68.
infrastructure or because they are subject to so many 
hazards that they are unsafe to inhabit. If we begin planning now, we will be much 
more likely to recover quickly following a major 
 jurisdictions will face many questions earthquake. Local jurisdictions that lay the 
as they seek to rebuild in the months and years groundwork for rebuilding  by continuously 
following a disaster:updating their general plans and zoning codes before 
a major disaster  will be in a much better place to 
How should local governments balance the need begin a conversation with residents about a recovery 
to rebuild quickly with the need to make careful, vision. 
deliberative decisions that will shape the future of 
the region? By understanding local earthquake hazards 
and addressing them before the next disaster, 
How should we plan for growth in areas of jurisdictions can reduce the amount of damage their 
earthquake-related hazards such as liquefaction cities will face and the amount of rebuilding that 
and landslides? will need to take place in the recovery period. And 
by making needed regulatory changes now, local 
How will existing tools and regulations help, or jurisdictions will have the tools they need to facilitate 
hinder, the rebuilding process? recovery. 
                                          Report / January 20133
On  
Introduction
The United States Geological following an earthquake, most have not developed comprehensive 
Survey estimates that there recovery and rebuilding plans for the months and years after a major 
is a 63 percent chance of a seismic event. There are many reasons for this. For one, it is difcult 
large earthquake occurring to determine before a major earthquake exactly which areas will 
in the  sometime be damaged. In addition, recovery planning requires cooperation 
in the next 30 years. At the across departments that may not have a history of working together. 
same time, we will be adding Moreover, recovery planning is not typically a well-funded activity for 
more than 2 million new local governments.
map 2013 Googleresidents to our region in the 
next 30 years, bringing the s total population to more than Following Hurricane Katrina, the United States Congress mandated 
9 million. Some of the areas targeted for the highest levels of future that federal agencies improve the nations capacity to plan for and 
development are susceptible to earthquake-related hazards, including manage post-disaster recovery. In 2011, the Federal Emergency 
liquefaction (when strong shaking causes soils to behave like liquid) Management Agency (FEMA) released the National Disaster Recovery 
and tsunami inundation, as well as other hazards such as sea level Framework as a guide to promote a more unied, collaborative and 
rise.effective recovery, particularly for those incidents that are large-scale 
or catastrophic. It specically identies local governments as the 
Many of these places currently support regionally important primary players in planning and managing all activities to restore, 
economic hubs and are home to dense communities. The Bay redevelop and revitalize their communities and build a more resilient 
Areas infrastructure and population centers were developed long nation.1
before these were recognized as high-hazard areas. The region is 
making strides to protect these investments, but we have more This report deals with one crucial set of disaster recovery activities: 
work to do. We need to consider earthquake risks when developing those that focus on land use planning and rebuilding. Land use 
new land use plans. We need to build a culture of preparedness planning refers to the set of decisions that determine what gets 
around our planning activities, continuously updating our plans built where  and how. This includes the adoption of land use 
and codes so that when the next earthquake strikes, we will be in a plans that set the vision for growth in a community (such as a 
position to rebuild quickly and well. If we fail to do so, we run the citys general plan or a specic plan for a neighborhood), as well as 
risk of undermining the economy of the entire region and losing our zoning decisions that govern the height, bulk and allowable uses 
residents, perhaps permanently.of buildings. It also includes decisions about which seismic codes 
new buildings will be required to meet following the disaster. Land 
When a major earthquake strikes the , the region could use planning also includes decisions about where not to build. For 
face thousands of casualties and hundreds of thousands of displaced example, we may decide that certain areas should be left as open 
households. Estimates of the cost to rebuild damaged housing, space because they are poorly served by existing infrastructure or 
businesses and infrastructure following a major earthquake on because they are subject to so many hazards (including liquefaction, 
the Hayward Fault exceed $100 billion  and $150 billion for a ooding and sea level rise) that they are unsafe to inhabit.
signicant quake on the San Andreas Fault. The lives of  
residents will be enormously disrupted, and it could take months to The recommendations of this report are targeted to local governments 
rebuild and reestablish essential services. Recovery will be slow and in the . Local governments are responsible for almost all 
will depend on the extent of the building damage, the amount of land use decisions within their boundaries. Zoning, general plan 
business lost, the availability of utilities and how quickly communities amendments and building permitting are done by local government. 
can repair and rebuild their housing.
While many jurisdictions in the  have well-dened plans 1  FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency). 2011. National Disaster 
to address disaster response in the immediate days and weeks Recovery Framework: Strengthening Disaster Recovery for the Nation, www.
fema.gov/pdf/recoveryframework/ndrf.pdf
4   Report / January 2013
There are no easy answers to these questions. However, having a 
Phases of Disaster Planningclear understanding of some of the challenges local governments will 
face in the recovery period can lead these agencies to take certain 
Before the Disasteractions now  before the next major disaster strikes  that will 
In advance of the disaster, we need to focus on hazard-mitigation increase the likelihood of success in the post-disaster period.
activities. What do we need to be doing now to make sure If we begin planning now, we will be much more likely to recover 
that our built environment can recover quickly from a major quickly following a major earthquake. Local jurisdictions that lay 
earthquake? Which existing buildings need to be retrotted  the groundwork for rebuilding  by continuously updating their 
and to what standard of performance? How do we encourage general plans and zoning codes before the disaster  will be in a 
better performance from new buildings? How do we strengthen much better place to begin a conversation with residents about a 
our lifelines so that our buildings are served by water, sewer and recovery vision. By understanding local earthquake hazards and 
power after an earthquake?addressing them before the disaster, jurisdictions can reduce the 
amount of damage their cities will face and the amount of rebuilding 
Disaster Responsein the recovery period. And by making needed regulatory changes 
In the immediate days and weeks following a catastrophic before the disaster, local governments will have the tools they need to 
event, response activities should focus on public health and facilitate recovery.
safety, evacuation, ensuring the safety of responders, restoring 
vital systems, damage assessment and communication with the Conversely, if we fail to begin planning before the disaster, we run the 
public.risk of undermining our future recovery. Buildings and infrastructure 
that havent been planned with earthquake risk in mind could be 
After the Disasterseverely damaged after a major event. Jurisdictions that havent 
In the months and years following the disaster, we will need to continuously updated their general plans and zoning codes in the 
focus on long-term recovery. How will we determine what to pre-disaster period may be forced to do so in the post-disaster period 
rebuild the same as it was before the disaster and what to rebuild  when time is short and emotions run high. Without the necessary 
differently? How do we restore our major pieces of infrastructure?procedures in place to receive public funding for recovery, local 
governments could lose out on the resources they will need to rebuild 
their cities.
After a disaster, local governments will be responsible for developing 
a vision for their communities recoveries, determining what will be The good news is that there are many steps we can take in advance 
rebuilt the same as it was before the disaster and what will be rebuilt of the next earthquake to ensure a successful recovery. This report 
differently. They will need to develop new planning processes, both provides recommendations for what local jurisdictions can do now 
to help speed permitting in areas that are being rebuilt according  before the next disaster  to help support recovery, as well as 
to existing zoning and to create processes that involve the public recommendations for what should be done after the disaster during 
in deciding how to rebuild areas with severe damage. Local the recovery period.
governments will need to nd ways to work with regional agencies, 
utility providers and others to make sure that the infrastructure 
needed to support recovery is rebuilt quickly and effectively. And 
they will need to nd ways to communicate effectively with residents 
throughout the recovery process.
Jurisdictions seeking to rebuild in the months and years following a 
disaster will face difcult questions. How should local governments 
balance the need to rebuild quickly with the need to create a public 
process to guide decision-making? What regulatory tools can local 
governments make use of to aid recovery? How should we think 
about planning for growth in areas of liquefaction? What state and 
federal nancing will be available to local governments after an 
earthquake, and how should local governments plan to channel 
this funding to facilitate their recovery? What types of information 
does the public sector need to collect now in order to rebuild after a 
disaster, and what types of information will businesses and residents 
need to help make their own rebuilding decisions?
                                          Report / January 20135
On  
Lessons Learned From 
Recent Disasters
Loma Prieta Earthquake (1989), Santa Cruz County, CA
Magnitude 6.9 earthquake caused 63 deaths Post-Disaster Planning Actions
and 3,757 injuries and displaced 3,00012,000 Existing general plan and downtown plan were 
people. Damage throughout Northern California, replaced by a Downtown Recovery Plan adopted 
with major destruction of downtowns of Santa after an 18-month effort orchestrated by Vision 
Cruz and Watsonville. Santa Cruz, an organization formed to plan the 
recovery. The Santa Cruz Redevelopment Agency 
Pre-Disaster Planning Actionscreated new redevelopment areas and expanded 
USGSInventory of downtown unreinforced masonry redevelopment activities to nearly all commercial 
See page 16 for complete case studybuildings and limited occupancy of some upper districts of the city. Stakeholders and volunteers 
oors of unreinforced masonry buildings.set up temporary pavilions for downtown retail 
businesses.
Northridge Earthquake (1994), Los Angeles, CA
Magnitude 6.7 earthquake caused 57 deaths, Post-Disaster Planning Actions
disrupted regions freeways and infrastructure Existing plans and zoning were used as 
systems, damaged 25,000 businesses, 100,000 the blueprint for recovery. The Community 
housing units and left 22,000 people homeless. Redevelopment Agency surveyed damage and 
conducted community meetings to determine the 
Pre-Disaster Planning Actions viability of establishing new redevelopment areas 
City of Los Angeles staff had completed a pre-in damaged locations to facilitate recovery. Four 
Flickr user standardpixel (CC BY-2.0)event recovery plan that was awaiting City Council areas were ultimately adopted. A pre-existing 
See page 57 for complete case studyapproval at the time of earthquake. Existing redevelopment area, Hollywood, was also well-
community plans, specic plans and zoning were positioned to leverage post-disaster resources for 
up to date. Rebuild L.A., a reconstruction effort recovery.
launched after the 1992 L.A. Riots, was actively 
underway.
Kobe Earthquake (1995), Kobe, Japan
Magnitude 6.9 earthquake caused 6,400 deaths, Post-Disaster Planning Actions
damaged all urban lifelines and transportation Planners built on the work done as part of the 
systems, destroyed 100,000 buildings and general plan update to rapidly develop a recovery 
displaced 100,000 people. Fire consumed 203 plan (i.e., just ve months to develop a high-level 
acres of urban land. vision of recovery and identify priority recovery 
areas). A second phase of planning in each of the 
Degenkolb EngineersPre-Disaster Planning Actions priority recovery areas took longer to complete and 
Studies of areas susceptible to re and ooding focused on more detailed land use decisions and 
See page 20 for complete case studyrisk lead to the development of a plan for involved neighborhood deliberation and consensus 
replacing wooden structures and promoting new building.
re standards. The plan did not propose specic 
actions. Just prior to the earthquake, the city 
completed a major update to its general plan.
6   Report / January 2013
In many recent disasters around the world, governments took steps 
before the disaster to aid recovery. Those jurisdictions that did 
not do advance planning work had a much harder time rebuilding 
quickly after a disaster. 
Hurricane Katrina (2005), New Orleans, LA
A massive hurricane overwhelmed New Orleans Post-Disaster Planning Actions
levees and ooded the city, affecting 80 percent The rst two post-disaster citywide planning efforts, 
of its land area and almost 230,000 homes.  the Bring New Orleans Back Commission (BNOB) 
More than 1,400 deaths occurred in Louisiana; and the New Orleans Neighborhood Rebuilding 
most in New Orleans. Population dropped from Plans, were controversial and lacked the necessary 
455,000 pre-storm to 200,000 in the months political support to be implemented. Some 
following the storm.neighborhoods organized their own recovery plans. 
Finally, in late 2006, various public entities agreed 
Pre-Disaster Planning Actionsto support the development of a Unied New 
The City Planning Commission had been working Orleans Plan (UNOP). UNOP included a signicant 
on a long-overdue master plan update for several public outreach component and proposed policies 
years and had approved some sections of the plan. that would incentivize the recovery of repopulating 
Flickr user www.nola.comThe citys zoning was inconsistent with the land areas and the clustering of residents in areas that 
See page 44 for complete case studyuse component of the master plan, and the master were slow to repopulate. Ultimately, it took nearly 
plan lacked authority to enforce compliance. The two years for New Orleans to develop a recovery 
city was working on a hazard mitigation plan in plan.
2005.
Christchurch Earthquakes (2010 and 2011), 
Christchurch, New Zealand
Two earthquakes (magnitude 7.1 in 2010 and Post-Disaster Planning Actions
magnitude 6.3 in 2011) led to 180 deaths, the As part of claims process, EQC conducted land 
decimation of the central business district,  damage assessments. These allowed the national 
damage to 65,000 residential properties and government to understand where risks of future 
damage to roads, water, waste water and storm-damage could occur. Properties were classed in 
Mary Comeriowater systems.four zones. Green zones were deemed suitable for 
rebuilding, red zones were not; others required 
See page 31 for complete case studyPre-Disaster Planning Actions further investigation. Repair and reconstruction 
New Zealands national Earthquake Commission standards were tied to the level of risk in different 
(EQC) offers natural disaster insurance coverage for areas. In red zones, the national government is 
residential properties; these policies also include conducting buyouts.
funds to repair earthquake-caused land damage. 
Source: Charles Eadie and Laurie Johnson
                                          Report / January 20137
On  
Land Use Planning Damage happens at many different scales, so rebuilding must also 
take place at different scales.
Challenges That Affect Disasters come in all sizes and may affect various parts of the region 
differently. Disasters can create heavy damage at the site level, the 
Recovery neighborhood level, the citywide level or the regional level. Cities 
need to determine which areas to rebuild according to the codes and 
plans that were in place in advance of the disaster, as well as which 
After a major earthquake, local governments will face many areas to re-plan. (See Figure 1 on page 14.)
challenges. Some will be informed by the economic and social 
trends that were happening before the disaster occurred. Others The rst plan is often the most powerful plan, but it may not be 
will be lessened  or exacerbated  by the regulatory and political the best plan.
environment in which recovery takes place.After a disaster, local governments will face enormous pressure to 
rebuild what previously existed. This can be thought of as the rst 
Negative trends already occurring before the disaster will only be plan because it is the plan that many people will have in their minds 
exacerbated after the disaster.as their desired recovery vision. Yet the rst plan may not be the 
If the disaster occurs in a region (or part of a region) that was already best plan for any number of reasons. It may not take liquefaction 
experiencing an economic downturn, the downturn will worsen as and other hazards into account; it may not be feasible nancially or 
a result of the disaster. Similarly, if a region or part of a region is physically; it may not make the most of opportunities for improving 
experiencing population stagnation or loss, that trend will also grow.infrastructure. Many residents may have a hard time contemplating 
any changes to their neighborhoods or cities in the heightened 
Planning challenges that impacted city building before the disaster emotional environment after a disaster.
will hamper recovery after the disaster. 
The lack of consensus around a planning agenda, the length of time Currently there are many federal and state programs dedicated 
it takes to conduct a neighborhood plan and complete environmental to recovery, but they may not always provide the resources that 
review of that plan, and the difculty of getting such plans adopted communities want and need.
present challenges under normal circumstances. In the complex and Are programs structured to allow funding to ow quickly to the 
emotionally charged time period after a disaster, these issues will only specic needs of the region? Do they require local matching funds? 
prove more daunting.Do they create unnecessary bureaucracy? Conversely, do they allow 
time for careful, strategic deliberation regarding the best way to target 
The codes and plans that exist at the time of the disaster are likely public investment?
to be the ones that govern how the vast majority of rebuilding 
occurs.Good information may not be readily available.
Unfortunately, some local codes and plans may have been developed After a disaster, local authorities need information to make good 
decades earlier and could be outdated. In some cases, local general decisions, but the most important data may not be readily available. 
plans and zoning do not conform to one another. Given that funding It will be critical for jurisdictions to quickly complete comprehensive 
for long-range planning in local jurisdictions has dwindled, this post-disaster damage-and-loss assessments for public facilities 
problem is likely to get worse as time passes.and infrastructure, private housing and commercial buildings, 
and economic and social needs. Yet jurisdictions will likely face 
After a disaster there will be enormous pressure to rebuild large hurdles in quickly gathering the information needed to make 
quickly, and the tension between rebuilding quickly and rebuilding decisions.
deliberately will be heightened. 
In large part, the key activities of urban development also happen 
in disaster recovery  but now they need to happen much faster. 
Development and construction that typically take years must occur 
in a matter of weeks or months. In the processes associated with 
normal city building, there is always a tension between moving 
quickly and taking time to make careful, well-thought-out decisions. 
In the post-disaster period, this tension increases as timelines 
compress and speed becomes an essential measure of recovery.  
However, local governments must rebuild well (not just quickly), 
must ensure that building repairs are done correctly and must 
consider opportunities to improve earthquake safety  or make the 
community better in other ways.
8   Report / January 2013
Section 1 
  Developing a Recovery Vision: 
Gearing Up and Sorting Out Versus 
Ready, Fire, Aim
                                          Report / January 20139
On  
After rst responders (police, reghters and the in sync with larger forces, such as market forces and demographic 
like) cope with the immediate challenges of disaster trends, and that its technically feasible. Outside expertise can be 
response, questions related to long-term recovery will invaluable in helping to dene the recovery vision.
quickly arise. How will damaged areas be rebuilt? 
When will utility services be back on line? Which areas Assess the level of difculty of different recovery 
are safe to return to and which are not? What nancing activities. 
is available to assist in rebuilding?  Questions to consider: Given the damage and the recovery goals, 
what parts of the recovery can occur with a limited degree of 
Local governments will need to nd ways to answer these questions difculty? What looks difcult or infeasible for any reason? What 
and many others in the months following a disaster. Without a clear additional information do we need to understand feasibility? 
process in place for deliberative decision-making, the tendency will 
be to act now and think later. Some have described this phenomenon Making priorities is difcult, but in the recovery period it is simply 
as ready, re, aim. While this approach can satisfy the desire to impossible to put the appropriate time, money and energy into 
act quickly to facilitate recovery, it can lead to missteps and missed everything thats needed. Triage is a useful concept. The community 
opportunities. It can also cause upset and confusion later if earlier will need to focus on identifying and then doing those things that are 
decisions need to be rethought in order to support a better outcome. both critical and feasible. 
Instead of ready, re, aim,  recommends a process of gearing 
up and sorting out. This involves working through the series of steps 
and questions outlined below. The answers to the questions will differ Explore new opportunities to make things better.
from jurisdiction to jurisdiction based on the nature of the damage, Question to consider: Are there new opportunities to be explored in 
the type of recovery that is needed and the jurisdictions capacity to light of steps 1, 2 and 3? 
undertake recovery activities. 
After a disaster, many community members may have an initial 
impulse to put things back the way they were, but recovery efforts 
must shift from looking back at the past to imagining a different but 
Assess the damage.achievable future. This is an opportunity to consider changes that 
Questions to consider: What happened and how bad is it? What could be transformative and to determine whether they are viable. 
additional information do we need to understand the situation?
Confusion, uncertainty and incomplete or inaccurate information are 
endemic to an emergency. Its easy to get lost in the details, and its Sort out the interventions and/or planning necessary 
difcult to step back and reect on the bigger picture. Recovery starts to address each element of recovery.
with damage assessment and then follows with an analysis of how Question to consider: Which recovery efforts need extensive 
that damage denes what must be done to emerge whole again. attention or intervention and which can be accomplished with 
minimal attention?
Dene the recovery end state. Each intervention will need to have a well-conceived and appropriate 
planning approach.
Questions to consider: What does recovery look like? What is the 
desired end state?  
Each communitys recovery has to be self-dened, for the community Decide who decides.
as a whole and for its individual neighborhoods. Any community Questions to consider: Who should design the planning process? 
affected by an earthquake will likely grapple with many simultaneous Who are the key leaders/stakeholders for each element of recovery 
recoveries: of neighborhoods and business districts, port facilities, planning? 
infrastructure and more. This will call for coordinated thinking at both 
the neighborhood and citywide level. Ideally, each community will In this step, outcomes begin to meet strategies and processes. A 
develop and articulate a vision that captures what it is seeking to community must determine the appropriate path and process for 
become and how the pieces will t together.each of the many recovery tasks; this will require dening the leaders 
and stakeholders and specifying the community involvement. This is 
But that vision should be grounded in reality, not just wishful also an area that may require outside expertise and experience. 
thinking. The viability of a plan depends on making sure its ideas are 
10   Report / January 2013
Section 1: Developing a Recovery Vision
Rebuilding to Current Plans 
Determine administrative and policy-making roles. 
Questions to consider: Who can and will do what, and what are Versus Re-Planning 
the appropriate matches of functional capacities and recovery 
components? How capable is each player to carry out planning In the process of gearing up and sorting out, local governments will 
activities? How does that affect decisions about the planning need to decide what to rebuild and repair according to current plans 
process?and codes versus what to re-plan after a disaster. 
The local government usually takes the lead in implementing the Rebuilding and repairing according to current plans means building 
recovery vision, which will likely require organizational adaptations structures to conform with the zoning, general plans, specic area 
and additional resources. Political and administrative leaders may plans and other adopted area plans that were in place before the 
need to redene their level of oversight and control; organizations in disaster. It also means repairing structures to conform with the 
turn may require reinvention or reorganization. requirements of the California Building Code and any existing local 
interpretations of the code. For areas that are being rebuilt according 
to existing plans and codes, local jurisdictions need to develop 
Dene the processes.permitting processes to enable private individuals to rapidly rebuild 
Questions to consider: How does each process start, and who leads? their properties.
What are the roles of the public and private sectors? What roles do 
nonprots play? What is an appropriate and/or necessary time frame Re-planning occurs when a jurisdiction adopts new zoning 
for various planning interventions?regulations and new general plan updates and specic area plans 
after a disaster. Re-planning can also include building code upgrades 
Recovery planning entails dening detailed timelines and benchmarks that require greater strengthening or other measures to increase 
that will move a general recovery vision toward the specic decisions, seismic performance. For areas that need to be re-planned, local 
policies and implementing mechanisms. The process must be fully jurisdictions need to develop planning processes that are inclusive, 
understood by all parties involved in implementing it. False starts and clear and transparent. Efforts must be made to ensure that those who 
backtracking, which can result from overly bureaucratic processes or have been displaced by the disaster are able to participate in the 
poor political leadership, can severely undermine recovery efforts and re-planning process.
should be avoided.
Of course there are gray areas between these two categories of action. 
Interpreting the requirements of the current building code to assure 
that post-earthquake repair and retrot standards can be met could 
Figure out what additional information is needed.t in either category. And actions from both categories will occur 
Questions to consider: What additional information is needed for in different parts of a local jurisdiction at various times during the 
each element of recovery planning? How will that information be recovery period. In addition, local governments will likely take steps 
obtained? What information is absolutely critical in light of time and to allow for interim or temporary rebuilding activities to help facilitate 
capacity limitations?recovery. These interim steps could potentially precede a re-planning 
process.  
The need for information (e.g., information about what has been 
damaged, how much it will cost to rebuild, when utility service will The decision to rebuild and repair to current plans and codes or 
be restored, etc.) is a constant throughout the recovery process. to rebuild according to new plans and codes will be informed by a 
Because there will never be enough information at any given variety of factors, including: 
moment, each step will involve discomfort and uncertainty. Mistakes 
are inevitable but can be minimized if we make sure that even where The scale and severity of the damage
information is incomplete or unavailable, we know enough to have a If an area is severely damaged and/or if the damage covers a wide 
reasonable basis for any particular course of action.area, a jurisdiction may engage in a re-planning process. If an area 
is not very damaged, or if the damage is limited to just a few sites, a 
re-planning process may not be necessary. 
Determine who is responsible for carrying out the 
answers to questions in steps 19.Whether or not the damage is located in an area that is likely to 
Question to consider: Who is leading, and who is involved in the experience more damage in the future, such as a liquefaction zone 
overall effort of gearing up and sorting out? or a ood plain
If a heavily damaged area is located in a liquefaction zone or another 
                                          Report / January 201311
On  
hazardous area, local jurisdictions may develop mitigation measures The jurisdictions capacity to engage in a re-planning process 
to alleviate the hazardous conditions and/or create new standards for After a disaster, some jurisdictions, especially small ones with very 
development. Local jurisdictions may want to consider rezoning areas few planning staffers, may lack the capacity to engage in a re-
that pose serious risks for major damage in the future. This issue is planning process, in which case they would require outside resources.
explored in more detail in Section 2 of this report. (See Earthquake 
Hazards in the  on page 23.)Government action is not the only driver of recovery efforts. Private 
individuals, nancial institutions and investors will also be making 
The degree to which the existing plans and codes are both current decisions about recovery in response to a separate but related series 
and consistent with one another of factors. If private individuals do not tip in, i.e., seek to stay in 
Many jurisdictions engage in planning activities on an ongoing basis, their community and participate in rebuilding, recovery may not 
developing new area plans and updating zoning. The creation of occur.
a new area plan is often the result of a community planning effort 
involving a variety of stakeholders. If a disaster strikes an area that 
has recently undergone a major planning effort, it is helpful to have s Recommendations for 
a vision for recovery that residents have recently agreed upon, such 
as a newly adopted area plan. Some jurisdictions, on the other hand, Developing a Recovery Vision
have outdated general plans and zoning for portions of their cities. 
Sometimes zoning may not be consistent with the general plan. Local 
planning departments should keep their general plans and zoning 
current so that decisions to change plans and zoning in the post-1. Update codes and plans now to build a culture 
disaster period can be kept to a minimum. of preparedness and help facilitate post-disaster 
recovery.
Whether or not the damage impacts publicly owned land or 
infrastructure Local jurisdictions take on planning activities for a variety of reasons: 
It is politically difcult for jurisdictions to tell private property owners in response to the development of new infrastructure such as BART 
that they cannot rebuild their homes and businesses as they were or high-speed rail, to increase housing and jobs near transit and to 
before the disaster. It may be somewhat easier to make changes to manage growth that results from a booming economy or intensied 
publicly owned land and infrastructure. For example, San Francisco demand for housing. Local jurisdictions in the  should also 
replaced the Embarcadero Freeway with a surface boulevard after the be continuously striving to complete planning activities, because these 
Loma Prieta Earthquake. This radical change in public infrastructure plans will serve as a road map for recovery. It is much more difcult 
opened up the city to the bay and allowed for the development of a to update plans and codes in the post-disaster period. The more these 
new neighborhood (South Beach) and the AT&T Ballpark. plans and codes can be kept current, the more likely it is that the 
rules for what can be rebuilt after a disaster will be claried quickly. 
The economic condition and potential of the affected area
If an area heavily impacted by a disaster is unlikely to receive the In addition, local jurisdictions should incorporate recovery planning 
private investment necessary to recover, a re-planning process  into the community-safety element of their local general plans. This 
coupled with tools to help stoke investment interest  may be will provide an opportunity for planning departments to begin thinking 
necessary to jumpstart recovery. Local jurisdictions may also engage now about what steps they will need to take in the post-disaster 
in re-planning to capitalize on economic development opportunities in period.
the wake of a disaster. 
Responsible Parties: Planning and building departments
The complexity of ownership and land tenure
Land and property ownership structures can complicate recovery. 2. Answer the question of who decides who decides 
An individual owner of a single-family home who has access to the in the post-disaster period. 
resources necessary for repair may be more likely to rebuild after a A clear governance structure is critical to a successful recovery. 
disaster than the owner of a condominium in a multiunit building who While most jurisdictions have a very clear line of command during 
has to engage in decision-making with many people through a condo the response period (the days and weeks immediately following a 
association. Additionally, residents who live in rental apartments will disaster), the governing structure during the recovery period can 
not be able to make decisions about whether or not their units are be much less clear. If this structure is unclear, it will be impossible 
rebuilt  the building owners will make those decisions. Owners for a local jurisdiction to develop a unied vision for recovery and 
decisions regarding rental properties will have a substantial impact on communicate it to private citizens, the business community and other 
recovery, especially in cities with high renter populations, such as San levels of government. 
Francisco. 
12   Report / January 2013
Section 1: Developing a Recovery Vision
One option is to create a recovery task force with powers to develop 4. Develop a state-level recovery plan.
and implement the recovery plan. Such a task force should have 
high-level representation from the agencies responsible for carrying Many actions need to happen at the state level to help facilitate local 
out recovery activities; the planning director and the director of the recovery; for examples, see Section 3 of this report on page 34. 
building department must participate. Additionally, the new National Disaster Recovery Framework (NDRF) 
calls for each state to create the position of state recovery coordinator. 
The National Incident Management System (NIMS) has established The California Emergency Management Agency should develop a 
a comprehensive, nationwide, systematic approach to managing state-level recovery plan that identies the role that any future state 
incidents such as natural disasters and terrorist attacks, enabling recovery coordinator will play in the post-disaster period and lays out 
public and private organizations to coordinate their efforts. Most steps to be taken after the disaster to facilitate recovery, including any 
state and local emergency management organizations operate in enabling legislation that will need to be enacted.
accordance with NIMS. The emphasis of this system is on emergency 
response and short-term recovery operations.2 However, some Responsible Parties: California Emergency Management Agency
communities have also structured their recovery plans to complement 
and work in tandem with the NIMS-based organizational structure, 
extending that structure beyond the emergency response period 
to cover short-term recovery actions and help local governments 5. Put in place a clear structure of governance to 
transition into recovery. If a local recovery-management organization 
also follows a NIMS-based organizational structure, then staff from oversee recovery. Those in charge will be responsible 
agencies and departments with key recovery responsibilities, such as for gearing up and sorting out. 
city planning and building, could replace emergency responders as 
the transition from response to recovery occurs, and hourly and daily This step can include activating a recovery task force soon after a 
planning sessions could evolve into weekly or biweekly sessions as disaster occurs. The NDRF recommends appointing a local disaster 
recovery progresses.recovery manager. This person would lead in the creation of a local 
recovery organization and initiatives, including any post-disaster 
Responsible Parties: Mayors, city councils and city managers in recovery planning efforts. The recovery manager would also work 
consultation with planning, building and emergency management with state and federal recovery partners to conduct damage and 
departments impact assessments, prioritize recovery needs, identify recovery 
funding sources, measure recovery progress and ensure effective 
3. Draft a recovery and reconstruction ordinance that and consistent communication with stakeholders and the public. It 
can be modied and adopted in the post-disaster is important that the recovery task force and recovery managers help 
ensure that decisions made during the response period help, rather 
period.than harm, recovery.
A recovery and reconstruction ordinance is critical for laying out the Responsible Parties: Mayors, city councils and city managers in 
rules that guide recovery. Such an ordinance should cover topics consultation with planning, building and emergency management 
such as the governance structure that will guide recovery, how the departments
recovery plan will be coordinated with regional plans and federal 
agencies, what temporary regulations will be in place during the 6. Determine which areas will be rebuilt according 
emergency period, how moratoriums on development might be 
enacted and how non-conforming uses will be handled, among other to existing plans and codes and which will be 
topics.re-planned.
Developing an ordinance before the disaster that can be modied Deciding which areas will be rebuilt according to existing plans and 
to address a jurisdictions specic recovery needs during the codes and which will be re-planned will be one of the most difcult 
post-disaster period will be very helpful. The American Planning tasks local governments face. There will be enormous pressure to 
Association has drafted a sample ordinance that local jurisdictions rebuild what existed before the disaster and to do so quickly. 
can use as a template.3
Responsible Parties: Planning departments in coordination with city 2  DHS (U.S. Department of Homeland Security). 2008. National Incident 
managers and departments of emergency managementManagement System, www.fema.gov/pdf/emergency/nims/NIMS_core.pdf
3  Schwab, Jim et al. 1998. Planning for Post-Disaster Recovery and 
Reconstruction, American Planning Association and Federal Emergency 
Management Agency. Report Number 483/484, page 1,947.
                                          Report / January 201313
On  
Figure 1: Rebuild or Re-Plan?
Rebuilding takes place on many scales: at the individual site and at the neighborhood, city and 
regional levels. If damage is modest, individual buildings are likely to be rebuilt to existing plans and 
codes. If damage is more severe and covers most of a city or region, re-planning may be necessary. 
Low-Impact Event
Low to moderate damage, loss of pHigh-Impact Event
Extensive destruction, loss of life, 
life, and population and economic population and economic dislocation; 
dislocation; primarily requires repair or requires re-planning and major 
restoration of homes and facilitiesreconstruction
If only a few buildings within a If damage extends across many 
neighborhood are damaged, they will buildings or is located in an area 
likely be rebuilt according to existing characterized by substantial hazards, 
Siteplans and codes.it may be necessary to replan some 
parts of a neighborhood.
If small pockets of a neighborhood If many buildings are damaged and 
are damaged and infrastructure is lifelines like power and water are 
minimally disrupted, it is likely to be disrupted, or if damage is located in 
rebuilt to exisiting plans and codes.an area characterized by substantial 
Neighborhoodhazards, the neighborhood may need 
to be replanned.
Those areas that have not experienced If many neighborhoods have been 
much damage are likely to be rebuilt severely damaged, lifelines have 
according to existing plans and codes. been disrupted and/or substantial 
hazards have been identied, a city 
Areas with more concentrated damage may choose to engage in a large-scale 
Citymay need to be replanned. replanning process.
If damage has occurred to If damage has occurred to multiple 
infrastructure crossing jurisdictional pieces of infrastructure crossing 
boundaries, improvements to such jurisdictional boundaries, many areas 
infrastructure may be needed.across the region have experienced 
Regionmajor damage and/or substantial 
hazards have been identied, a 
large-scale re-planning effort may be 
necessary. 
Source: Adapted from a table developed by Ken Topping.
Range of appropriate response
RebuildRe-plan
14   Report / January 2013
Section 1: Developing a Recovery Vision
Nevertheless, local governments need to take the time to determine information, a thoughtful and successful plan for recovery cannot be 
which areas, if any, require re-planning efforts.developed.
Responsible Parties: Recovery task force or other group overseeing Responsible Parties: Planning departments
recovery
9. Plan for interim uses that help support recovery.
7. For areas that will be rebuilt according to existing 
plans and codes, take steps to create a clear and It is critical to develop processes that are fair, clear and transparent, 
rapid process for private individuals to obtain the in which decisions can be made and permits issued rapidly. Local 
necessary permits to rebuild.jurisdictions must determine how to handle the enormous number of 
permitting requests that will occur in a compressed period of time. 
It is critical to develop processes that are fair, clear and transparent, Local governments must also decide how they will handle thorny 
in which decisions can be made and permits issued rapidly. Local issues, such as the rebuilding of structures that could not meet 
jurisdictions must determine how to handle the enormous number of current building and planning codes.
permitting requests that will occur in a compressed period of time. 
Local governments must also decide how they will handle thorny Responsible Parties: Planning departments in coordination with the 
issues, such as the rebuilding of structures that could not meet recovery task force or other group overseeing recovery
current building and planning codes.
Responsible Parties: Planning and building departments
8. For areas that will be re-planned, ensure that a 
community planning process is put in place to allow 
for meaningful and genuine participation from a 
variety of stakeholders. 
After a disaster, there may be areas that are severely damaged. The 
people who lived and worked in those areas before the disaster 
may move to other parts of the city or region  or even to another 
state  in the weeks and months following the disaster. Those who 
remain will likely be very upset or even traumatized by the effects of 
the disaster itself. They will also be very concerned about what their 
neighborhood will look like and who will be living there once the 
rebuilding process is complete. Even in normal times, neighborhood 
planning efforts and the possibility of change can be enormously 
unsettling for some. Those feelings can be magnied after a disaster.
It is critical that any re-planning process involve neighborhood 
representatives, community groups and key stakeholders such as 
property owners and nancial institutions. Planning will require 
a strong effort to contact those who have been displaced by the 
disaster so that they can also participate in the process. While local 
government ofcials may feel a strong desire to develop a new plan 
quickly, that urge needs to be balanced against the importance of 
community involvement.
If local governments decide to engage in re-planning within their 
jurisdictions, it will be critical to ensure that any community planning 
process is supported by good information. Participants need to 
be informed about what real opportunities and challenges exist, 
including nancial challenges. They need to understand the risks 
of rebuilding, including the danger of another disaster. Without 
                                          Report / January 201315
Case Study: Santa Cruz, CA
Out of Contentious Politics, a Successful Community Process
The epicenter of the 1989 historic district, and there were dozens of beloved old structures. 
Loma Prieta Earthquake was Most of the older structures were constructed of unreinforced 
in the Santa Cruz Mountains, masonry, rebuilt for safety after a major re in the late 1800s that 
about 9 miles southeast of claimed most of the wooden structures  which, ironically, would 
the City of Santa Cruz. While have fared well in the earthquake.
the initial publicity about 
the earthquake focused The damage on Pacic Avenue seemed almost random. Parapets 
around the Marina District collapsed; one toppled into an adjacent coffee house, killing three 
map 2013 Googlein San Francisco and the people. Some buildings looked as if a giants hand had punched a 
Cypress Freeway and Bay Bridge failures in Oakland, it soon became hole straight through them. Of the 1 million square feet of downtown 
apparent that Santa Cruz and Watsonville were the areas that space, one-third was damaged beyond repair, one-third was damaged 
experienced the greatest destruction.but repairable and one-third had no damage or only minor damage.
Damage in Santa Cruz was widespread throughout they citys Initially, the area was declared completely off-limits as damage 
urbanized areas and in the mountains. Transportation was severely was assessed and stabilized. But as the days went by, merchants, 
disrupted, with blockages on Highways 1 and 17. Liquefaction residents and property owners exerted increasing and intense 
occurred in the beach area of downtown Santa Cruz. Residential pressure to get access to the area to begin their own salvaging and 
structures suffered from major failures of foundations and internal recovery. The conict between those advocating for complete safety 
damage, and the area saw an epidemic of downed chimneys. Many and others who were willing to take on some risk resulted in difcult 
buildings on the University of California, Santa Cruz campus were times for ofcials and downtown stakeholders. 
impacted, some heavily.
Ultimately, a massive short-term effort involving a new ad hoc city 
While the damage was extensive, remarkably the human casualties organization and hundreds of volunteers accomplished several goals:
were limited to a small number of deaths and injuries. Nonetheless, t &WBMVBUJOHEBNBHFBOEEFNPMJTIJOHEBOHFSPVTCVJMEJOHTUPDSFBUF
the community and region were immediately traumatized as people safe conditions
shared the unsettling reality that  could behave like a t "MMPXJOHMPDBMNFSDIBOUT
QSPQFSUZPXOFSTBOESFTJEFOUTUPUBLF
rolling sea. Individuals and families grappled with the recovery of acceptable risk in order to salvage records, merchandise, personal 
homes and neighborhoods, but the primary focus of public attention belongings, medicine, etc.
and recovery planning in Santa Cruz was the historic downtown t &TUBCMJTIJOHBNBLFTIJGUSFUBJMEJTUSJDUJOUJNFUPTBMWBHFUIF
business district. Christmas shopping season by reopening some buildings and setting 
up temporary pavilions on parking lots to house displaced merchants 
The retail center, civic life and culture of Santa Cruz were anchored 
by the Pacic Garden Mall and the adjacent nine-square-block By 10 p.m. on the night before Thanksgiving  just ve weeks 
area. Pacic Avenue had been enhanced in the late 1960s as a after the quake struck  the last of the paving, cleanup and setup 
meandering street with widened sidewalks featuring raised brick was completed, and a patchwork downtown triumphantly opened 
planters, street trees and owers, and benches dening cozy sitting to widespread community support. The effort united the community 
areas. The retail environment was a mix of traditional downtown in ways not seen in decades. The love for downtown Santa Cruz 
merchants: a department store, a Woolworths, and mens and transcended a long-festering animus among various factions that had 
womens clothing stores, as well as eclectic specialty retail, artisan dened the local political scene during the previous decade.
galleries, music venues and eateries. This positive momentum and newfound sense of community 
Pacic Avenue and some adjacent streets were designated as a proved a necessary foundation as the community struggled over 
16   Report / January 2013
the ensuing two years to decide on how to proceed, eventually 
creating a Downtown Recovery Plan shepherded by Vision Santa 
Cruz, a 36-member advisory committee created by the Santa Cruz 
City Council to formulate a recovery plan. In order to assure that 
all perspectives had a voice, the business community chose 18 of 
the committee members (who included bankers, property owners, 
merchants and business associations), and the City Council chose 
the other 18, who were drawn from environmental, nonprot, 
advocacy, arts, neighborhood and other community-based groups. 
A panel from the Urban Land Institute (ULI) was invited to Santa 
Cruz to analyze and articulate some possible options for rebuilding. 
The ULI panelists interviewed dozens of people, then sequestered. 
Typically, a panel will prepare concepts and plans and then present 
them, but ULIs advice to Santa Cruz was stunning and direct: There 
was no point in preparing concept plans at all because the problem 
in Santa Cruz was political and social. No recovery would take place 
unless the community learned to work together and overcome divisive 
political habits. The community would need to shift its paradigm 
from fearing and obstructing new development to embracing it. In 
short, Santa Cruz needed new 
An external panels advice levels of engagement and 
to Santa Cruz was stunning collaboration.
and direct: There was no Recognizing the need to 
point in preparing concept move with both speed and 
plans because the problem deliberation, Vision Santa 
in Santa Cruz was political Cruz designed its planning 
and social. No recovery process to give adequate time 
for examining the issues while 
would take place unless avoiding backtracking and 
the community learned to rehashing issues. This required 
work together and overcome discipline, intense work and 
divisive political habits.community engagement. It 
meant that the plan had to 
have sufcient detail. It also 
meant that the key leaders had to fully participate from the beginning 
and not withhold their decision-making to the end. Policies were 
decided incrementally and cumulatively so that the nal approval by Photos by Charles Eadie 
the City Council was a happy formality.After the Loma Prieta Earthquake, Santa Cruz created an advisory 
body to develop a recovery plan. Known as Vision Santa Cruz, the 
The planning was done in two phases. First, Vision Santa Cruz group worked to include broad representation from all sectors, 
created a set of rst principles to articulate values, aspirations and engaging the public through workshops, an information center (top 
goals. The second phase was the Downtown Recovery Plan itself, right) and a scale model of downtown built by community members 
which actualized the aspirations with specic details, including (bottom).
design standards and actual designs for streets and public spaces. 
Over the course of the 18-month process, more than 50 people were 
members of Vision Santa Cruz. Public outreach was extensive and 
included a downtown information center with a scale model built by
                                          Report / January 201317
Charles Eadie Flickr user Theatre Historical Society
 
Charles Eadie Blake Gumprecht  
The rebuilding of downtown Santa Cruz went through many stages,  A fundamental reality also helped force action: The status quo 
including the creation of temporary pavilions to house retail (top left), was not an option. Urban design became a common ground 
the reconstruction of buildings and infrastructure (bottom left), and the for community engagement. It also provided an opportunity to 
rehabilitation of historic resources such as the Del Mar Theatre (top understand why the downtown could not be built back the way it was 
right). The city used the recovery process as an opportunity to widen and what needed to change in order to make the retail environment 
sidewalks and add public seating and retail kiosks, improvements work. An economic analysis indicated that the downtown would 
that have allowed the district to thrive as a retail and entertainment need to do 35 percent more business than it had before the quake. 
destination (bottom right).These economics did not support a return of the department stores, 
so the downtown also had to shift from more traditional retail toward 
entertainment and cultural venues, ofces, and specialty retail 
community members with oversight from a local furniture craftsman, catering to the growing student population and tourists.
who helped people make replicas of the buildings.
After a monumental effort involving public feedback, workshops, 
Reaching agreement on the recovery plan was an arduous process, subcommittees, consultants and staff work, the Downtown Recovery 
given the range of issues and the strongly held ideas that people had. Plan was approved in June 1991 and formally adopted by the City 
Multiple subcommittees and task forces took on particular details, Council in the fall of 1991 after an environmental impact report (EIR) 
working from a vision statement that was drafted and agreed upon was completed. Although the demolition of old buildings meant that 
early in the process. the downtown lost its historic district designation, the new design 
guidelines in the Downtown Recovery Plan successfully carried 
Ultimately, the size of the committee, while challenging and unwieldy forward details that captured many of the qualities the community 
in many ways, provided the critical mass needed for a consensus to wanted.
form in the middle while giving a voice to the most ardent advocates 
on the edges.Key to all of this was the forging of new relationships One of the most important features of the plan was that it allowed 
and the learning that came from hearing multiple perspectives, even administrative approval for projects that were consistent with the 
in heated and contentious discussions.design guidelines and accounted for in the EIR, thereby minimizing 
18   Report / January 2013
entitlement risk to builders. The recovery plan was adopted as a Although the demolition of other locations in the county 
specic plan under state law and therefore was both a general plan old buildings meant that the returned. Still, others did not 
and a zoning document. Because of the high level of detail in the survive for various reasons. The 
plan, subsequent projects could be approved administratively (as downtown lost its historic recession of the early 1990s 
opposed to requiring a discretionary permit that would need to go to district designation, new added difculty. Yet Santa Cruz 
the planning commission), and the plan EIR could be used for more design guidelines carried was fortunate to have two 
than a decade, minimizing risk to builders of new development. forward details that captured fundamental economic drivers 
Ultimately, the community trusted the plan and was comfortable that that supported downtown 
the high level of detail would ensure that projects would reect what many of the qualities the recovery. One was the growth 
people had agreed upon. At the same time, the quality standards community wanted.of UC Santa Cruz, whose 
provided assurance to investors, property owners and merchants that enrollment rose from 7,500 
the commitments and investments they made would not be undercut students at the time of the earthquake to more than 16,000 today. 
by projects that did not uphold the image and standards of the The growth in the student population fueled the vibrancy of the 
plan. Santa Cruz also benetted from the fact that many downtown downtown and led to a strong restaurant, entertainment and specialty 
properties and businesses were locally owned by people with deep retail environment. Secondly, Santa Cruz beneted from the growth 
roots in the community. Local lenders also provided early nancing of the Silicon Valley computer industry in the late 1990s, which 
when others were reticent. Thus, decisions and commitments to prompted tech companies to look for space in downtown Santa Cruz, 
rebuilding were made not just with concern for the bottom line but thereby leading to the development of new ofce space in that area.  
with a sense of civic obligation and respect for community. 
Six years after the earthquake, the turning point came when a new 
After the adoption of the Downtown Recovery Plan, a complete nine-screen cineplex project lled in the space previously occupied 
rebuilding of Pacic Avenue began. The public space was by Gottschalks department store. That brought new life to the 
landscaped, became more pedestrian-friendly and featured improved evening scene and new people into the downtown. Over time the 
visibility for the retail stores.redevelopment agency shifted its nancial support toward enhancing 
the physical appearance of the downtown (e.g., by improving 
With the streetscape in place, the recovery then proceeded on a pedestrian alleyways) and stepped away from direct involvement 
project-by-project basis, with many of the early projects involving in building projects. One key exception was the resurrection of the 
nancial support from the Santa Cruz Redevelopment Agency and historic Del Mar Theatre, which was restored to its former grandeur 
other outside sources, including state and federal recovery funding through a nancial partnership involving the redevelopment agency, 
and targeted development grants, Red Cross donations that the a private developer and a local theater operator. Today the beautiful 
agency had agreed to designate for local recovery (after a strong marquee is a highlight of the street.
political push), a temporary local sales tax measure dedicated for 
recovery, private donations and locally based risk capital. The city One of the key variables for successful recovery is the quality and 
established new redevelopment districts following the earthquake commitment of community leadership. Political logic often can be 
to nance public investment and support private projects. Tax at odds with planning or administrative logic, but Santa Cruz was 
increment nancing was a cornerstone of the recovery. Also key was able to bend and blend the forces to make recovery work. The city 
the passage of a six-year county-wide half-cent sales tax that was succeeded by delegating authority, allowing for real community 
distributed by formula among the cities and county. This money was engagement and trusting the process to produce a good outcome.  
limited to earthquake recovery only, but local authorities had great The community in turn was spectacularly willing to volunteer time 
exibility and discretion in deciding how to use it.and effort  and persist through some very difcult and controversial 
times. People maintained strongly held views and had many areas of 
Recovery started as a sprint but soon became a marathon. Many of disagreement, but collectively the community was able to place the 
the rst projects required public-private partnering to share nancial big picture and their love of place ahead of factionalism.
risk and were critical in setting momentum. The city also worked 
to apply building codes in ways that supported the rehabilitation of 
some key buildings. The citys redevelopment department encouraged 
property owners and investors, shepherded projects and made 
judicious use of public funding.
Gradually, the temporary pavilions came down as permanent 
space opened up or reopened. Some merchants who had set up in 
                                          Report / January 201319
Case Study: Kobe, Japan
Pre-Disaster Planning Supports Recovery
On January 17, 1995, a In the three years prior to for their ability to efciently 
magnitude 6.9 earthquake the earthquake, the city had craft a recovery plan that also 
struck the Kansai region had broad public support.9
of Japans main island worked to update its general  
It also gave city ofcials 
of Honshu. The region plan. Planners credit this condence to move quickly on 
comprises seven prefectures effort, and the community post-earthquake restoration 
and has three of Japans six network it cultivated, for planning.10
major cities, including the 
map 2013 Googletheir ability to efciently craft 
international port city of Kobe On the day after the 
(1.5 million people in 1995), where the impact was the strongest. a recovery plan that had earthquake, Kobes mayor 
The earthquake caused more than 6,400 deaths, damaged all broad public support.implemented a two-year 
urban lifelines and transportation systems and destroyed 100,000 moratorium on rebuilding 
buildings; nearly 100,000 people were homeless or displaced by in the citys hardest-hit areas. Eight days later, the city established 
the disaster.4 Widespread liquefaction occurred around the margins a recovery headquarters that took the lead in recovery planning 
of Osaka Bay, and res consumed 203 acres of urban land. In all, efforts. A 27-member recovery planning review committee was 
economic losses exceeded $150 billion, with more than $100 billion also established to help guide the planning process. Its members 
in property damage.5included city administrators and outside experts in economics, law, 
social welfare, social psychology, disaster prevention, engineering 
Kobes greatest previous disaster in the 20th century was World War and the environment. After a few months, the committee expanded 
II, when about 60 percent of the citys urban area was destroyed by into a 100-member recovery planning council that also included 
bombing.6 Kobe used land readjustment and redevelopment powers representatives from the City Council, citizens organizations, the 
to rebuild following the war, which provided a baseline of experience business community, labor unions, and national and prefectural 
for the 1995 recovery. Land readjustment involves modifying government representatives.11
property boundaries such that each landowner loses some land area. 
The resulting new parcels are typically used for public projects, such The City of Kobe developed a citywide restoration plan in just ve 
as road widening, open spaces and other public facilities.months after the 1995 earthquake.12 This rst phase of the plan 
established a high-level vision for the citys recovery and identied 
Several planning studies that began in the 1960s helped dene 
Kobes recovery framework. In 1967, Kobe University completed 4  City of Kobe, Japan. 1995. Kobe City Restoration Plan (Abridged Version).
a built environment inventory for the city that included several 5  Olshansky, Robert B., Laurie A. Johnson, and Kenneth C. Topping. 2005. 
interpretive maps of risks such as re and ooding, which correctly Opportunity in Chaos: Rebuilding After the 1994 Northridge and 1995 Kobe 
Earthquakes, www.urban.illinois.edu/faculty/olshansky/chaos/Opportunity-in-
identied some of the areas that later burned in 1995.7 Several Chaos-March2011.pdf
maps focused on existing building density, street widths, housing size 6  Ibid.
and housing age. These studies led to an urban redevelopment plan 7  Ibid
for replacing wooden structures and promoting new re prevention 8  Ibid
standards. This plan identied the most problematic areas, but it did 9  Ota, Toshikazu, Norio Maki, and Haruo Hayashi. 2009. Evaluating Planning 
not propose specic actions, nor did it prioritize areas most in need Process of the Kobe Recovery Plan Based on Project Management Framework. 
of redevelopment.8 In the three years prior to the earthquake, the city Journal of Disaster Research 4 (3): 271281.
had worked to update its general plan. Planners responsible for post-10  Ibid
disaster recovery planning credit this general plan update, as well as 11  Ibid
the community network that had been cultivated during that effort, 12  City of Kobe, Japan. 1995. Kobe City Restoration Plan (Abridged Version).
20   Report / January 2013
Ikuo Kobayashi Ikuo Kobayashi 
Laurie JohnsonLaurie Johnson
After the Kobe Earthquake, the city was able to use a recent Top, the Rokkomichi neighborhood weeks after the 1995 
update to its general plan to facilitate rapid rebuilding, developing earthquake and re. Below, the area rebuilt with a community 
a citywide restoration plan in just ve months. Top, the Takatori center, park and auxiliary water supply for re ghting.
neighborhood weeks after the 1995 earthquake and re. Below, 
the neighborhood rebuilt with widened streets and new parks 
added for future re protection.
the priority recovery areas (called restoration promotion districts), based on the maps of hazardous and obsolete areas from the 
the implementation approach for each district (e.g., redevelopment, planning efforts in the 1960s and 1970s. It was no coincidence that 
land readjustment or housing reconstruction policies), and the basic the areas of heaviest damage were those areas that had not been 
citywide design for arterial streets and major parks. The guidelines damaged and readjusted following World War II. Two large-scale 
from the June 1995 plan were then eshed out into more specic redevelopment projects underway prior to the earthquake were also 
plans for each restoration promotion district. These second-phase 
plans took longer to complete, involved neighborhood deliberation 
and consensus building and focused on internal street systems, land 13  Ota, Toshikazu, Norio Maki, and Haruo Hayashi. 2009. Evaluating Planning 
parcel layouts, park locations and other design elements.13Process of the Kobe Recovery Plan Based on Project Management Framework.   
4 (3): 271281.
Many of the previous planning activities strongly inuenced the 14  Olshansky, Robert B., Laurie A. Johnson, and Kenneth C. Topping. 2005. 
Opportunity in Chaos: Rebuilding After the 1994 Northridge and 1995 Kobe 
planning policies and the delineation of boundaries for the restoration Earthquakes, www.urban.illinois.edu/faculty/olshansky/chaos/Opportunity-in-
promotion districts.14 For example, land readjustment areas were Chaos-March2011.pdf
                                          Report / January 201321
expanded and accelerated afterward to help provide new housing and 
stimulate economic recovery.15
Shortly after the earthquake, the governor of Hyogo Prefecture 
identied specic recovery targets: to rebuild all damaged housing 
units in three years, remove all temporary housing within ve years 
and complete physical recovery in 10 years.16 Each month, the City 
of Kobe and the Hyogo Prefecture published information on the web 
and in the media, charting their progress toward these and other 
recovery goals. Both the city and prefecture also convened panels of 
international and domestic experts and community members to assess 
the progress made on these targets and other recovery issues and to 
recommend any needed changes to existing policies.17 These goals 
were critical in informing the national governments recovery funding 
decisions and in coordinating the wide range of participants involved in 
the recovery.18
Today, Kobe is a thriving city, mostly recovered from the 1995 
earthquake.19 The infrastructure and downtown were rebuilt within 
a few years, and the earthquake also created many opportunities 
for improvement, including additional parks, greater safety, new 
development and road widening. By 2005, Kobes population had 
rebounded and begun to surpass pre-earthquake levels. But the social 
environment of some neighborhoods was signicantly altered after 
the earthquake. High-rise residential buildings replaced the smaller 
wooden housing and poorly built postwar structures that had been 
destroyed by the earthquake. Land readjustment, redevelopment 
processes and density bonuses all contributed to signicant changes  
in the urban environment.
15  Ibid
16  GAO (Government Accountability Ofce). 2008. Disaster Recovery: Past 
Experiences Offer Insights for Recovering from Hurricanes Ike and Gustav and 
Other Recent Natural Disasters, Report to the Committee on Homeland Security 
and Governmental Affairs, U.S. Senate, www.gao.gov
17  Ibid
18  Hayashi, Haruo. 2007. Long-term Recovery from Recent Disasters in Japan 
and the United States. Journal of Disaster Research 2 (6): 413418.
19  Olshansky, Robert B., Laurie A. Johnson, and Kenneth C. Topping. 2005. 
Opportunity in Chaos: Rebuilding After the 1994 Northridge and 1995 Kobe 
Earthquakes, www.urban.illinois.edu/faculty/olshansky/chaos/Opportunity-in-
Chaos-March2011.pdf
22   Report / January 2013
Section 2 
Earthquake Hazards in the : 
Understanding and Addressing Our Risks
                                          Report / January 201323
On  
In every future earthquake, some locations in the 
 can be expected to experience heavier Earthquake Hazards 
damage than neighboring areas, unless we take steps The strong shaking of an earthquake can trigger additional 
hazards: 
to develop these areas in ways that minimize the 
risk. Earthquake hazards  including liquefaction, Liquefaction  Strong earthquake shaking can cause soil to 
lateral spreading, landslides, surface fault rupture and lose strength and behave as a liquid, displacing the ground that 
tsunami (see sidebar)  are all phenomena caused supports building foundations. Structures can settle, tip or be 
otherwise damaged. Areas most susceptible to liquefaction have 
by strong ground shaking, but they are separate and loose, granular soils that are saturated by groundwater. Older 
distinct processes that occur in predictable locations. articially lled areas, like many around the margin of the bay, are 
Because we know where earthquake hazards are likely particularly susceptible to liquefaction because they were created 
to occur, it makes sense to address these risks through when the  was rst developed, when no one understood 
our codes and land use plans. the dangers. Liquefaction can cause other serious hazards such as:
 
Lateral Spreading: The ground overlying liqueed materials can 
Different earthquake hazards affect low-lying areas and hillside areas. move freely down a slope, riding on the liqueed material. This 
Low-lying areas near the San Francisco Bay and in inland valleys process can displace the ground surface for large distances, 
face the threat of liquefaction and tsunamis. Many of these low-lying causing major destruction of structures and lifelines. 
areas are also subject to ooding and sea level rise. Although these 
last two risks are not triggered by earthquakes, they provide extra Settlement: This liquefaction-related phenomenon occurs when 
incentive to manage development in these areas with building codes, different parts of structures settle different amounts, causing 
zoning codes and land use plans that recognize the hazards.greater distress to those buildings.
Hillside areas face their own set of earthquake hazards, including Liquefaction can cause signicant damage to buildings and buried 
earthquake-induced landslides and surface fault rupture. (Surface lifelines, such as water and power lines. Structures affected by 
fault rupture can also occur in some low-lying locations.) Most liquefaction often need to be reconstructed. Areas expected to 
notably, the Hayward Fault crosses through heavily developed areas liquefy in future earthquakes have been identied in a number of 
in East Bay cities at the base of the foothills. Hillside areas are also hazard maps.
prone to hazards not triggered by earthquakes, including wildre and 
rainfall-induced landslides.Tsunami  In a body of water, a rapid disturbance such as an 
underwater landslide or an earthquake on an underwater fault 
The bulk of the regions earthquake-related risk lies in the low-lying can generate a series of waves that vertically displaces the water. 
plains near the bay, where liquefaction will occur. These areas ringing Tsunamis affecting the  are rare but could be caused by 
the bay are home to our major urban centers: San Francisco, Oakland nearby offshore earthquakes or distant events.
and San Jose. Densely occupied, these zones contain most of the 
regions job centers and the bulk of its multifamily housing. The Landslides  Earthquake shaking can trigger landslides that 
proliferation of high-tech companies in Silicon Valley has furthered damage or destroy entire hillside developments. These landslides 
this trend. Downtown San Francisco, with the greatest concentration may displace the ground surface only a few centimeters, or they 
of tall buildings in the region, sits on poor soils. Between 1850 and may cause slope failures, where entire hillsides slide in rapidly 
1960, lling the bay was one way to provide more land for ports, moving masses. A variety of landslide hazard maps have been 
industrial uses, airport runways and housing. The regions garbage produced for parts of the , and these maps can be used 
was conveniently used to ll this land, and nobody realized then that to plan for slope failure.
this technique created land with very high liquefaction risk.20 We can 
expect to see devastating and widespread damage from liquefaction Surface Fault Rupture  Faults are fractures along which blocks 
in future  earthquakes. The scale and location of the of the earths crust slide past each other. Earthquakes occur 
damage will depend upon the size and epicenter of the earthquake, when forces underground cause the faults beneath us to rupture 
but we should expect areas close to the bay to be hit hard.and suddenly slip. If the rupture extends to the surface, part of 
the ground shifts, ripping apart any structures on the rupture 
Inland valleys were largely developed after World War II with newer line. Fault rupture damage is rare and conned to a small zone. 
single-family homes and commercial buildings and fewer multiunit According to state law, construction near mapped fault lines must 
verify the fault location through digging trenches and conducting 
other geologic studies.
20  See www.bcdc.ca.gov/history.shtml
24   Report / January 2013
Section 2: Earthquake Hazards in the 
Figure 2: Liquefaction Susceptibility in the 
05102030
Miles
Liquefaction Susceptibility
Very Low
Low
Medium
High
Very High
Priority Development Areas
Fault Lines 
 County Lines
Sources: Association of  Governments: http://gis.abag.ca.gov/,  les accessed December 14, 2012United States Geological Survey: http://earthquake.usgs.gov/regional/nca/qmap/, les accessed December 14, 2012
Many parts of the  facing risk from earthquake-related hazards (including 
liquefaction) will continue to be developed in the coming years as the region gures out 
how to accommodate more than 2 million expected new residents in the coming 30 
years. The region has committed itself to reducing sprawl by placing new housing and 
jobs near transit within existing urban areas, which  strongly supports. However, 
some of the areas well served by transit are also subject to liquefaction, tsunamis, 
sea level rise and ooding, putting more people at risk from a variety of hazards. 
Good planning is needed to address risks in those high-hazard areas that have been 
designated priority development areas for future growth. 
                                          Report / January 201325
On  
apartments. Many of these are built to newer codes and should better The most effective way to reduce damage from secondary hazards is 
resist shaking damage. Development on the regions hillsides mainly not to build where they occur. This is currently not an option in many 
consists of single-family homes that range in age and vulnerability parts of the , although it may become feasible if large areas 
to earthquakes. Because the housing on hillsides is developed less experience heavy damage in a future earthquake. As an example 
densely, the scope of damage from secondary hazards is likely to of this approach, the plan to redevelop Treasure Island leaves the 
be smaller. But both hillsides and valleys will likely face signicant northeast corner of the island as parkland. There are a number of 
problems in localized areas.reasons for this choice, including the fact that liquefaction risk is 
highest on that part of the island.  
Critical infrastructure crosses all of these hazard zones. Major 
transportation corridors (Highways 101, 80, 580, 880 and 680) The period that follows an earthquake is an opportunity to repair 
run north and south and parallel to the regions valleys and low-and rebuild better and to reduce the likelihood of damage in future 
lying areas. These corridors are connected by roads, tunnels and earthquakes. It is important to remember that the  has more 
bridges running east and west, some of which cross faults. Major than one large earthquake in its future. The key thing to recognize 
transmission infrastructure bringing water and power to our region is that an excellent time to build resilience into our communitys 
also crosses this system of faults as it travels westward. Many of our secondary hazard zones is immediately following a damaging event. 
ports, airports and sewer-treatment facilities are located adjacent to It is cost-effective to make seismic improvements to structures when 
the bay on weak soils.they are already undergoing repairs or reconstruction. This is also 
the time when a community might best nd the political will to make 
Reducing Earthquake Hazards signicant land use or building regulation changes in a high-risk 
neighborhood.
There are three key approaches to reduce the potential damage from A plethora of complex regulations govern post-earthquake 
earthquake hazards:building repair and reconstruction. The application of regular 
1. Make improvements or changes to the land to reduce the hazards.codes  typically the California Building Code with some local 
2. Build in special ways in the hazard zones to reduce damage when amendments  will generally form the technical basis for repair and 
earthquakes occur.reconstruction, but a host of special regulations offer challenges and 
3. Develop land use plans that avoid concentrating dense uses in opportunities. It will be difcult for an individual building owner or 
earthquake hazard areas.design professional to become familiar with so many regulations, 
and a lack of clarity may result in extensive delays or in repairs or 
There are a number of technical approaches that can signicantly reconstruction that do not fulll an owners or jurisdictions goals or 
reduce the likelihood of liquefaction occurring during an earthquake. requirements. Cities and regions can accelerate post-disaster recovery 
These involve densifying, i.e., extracting water from the soil or by adopting clear policies and procedures on post-earthquake 
injecting material into it so that it will not liquefy. However, these building evaluation, repair and reconstruction.
techniques are expensive, time-consuming and generally only feasible 
for large undeveloped lots. Liquefaction remediation can make sense 
for signicant new developments, such as the redevelopment of 
Treasure Island. This project plans to spend two years and $130 
million (2010 dollars) to stabilize the island prior to construction 
work.21 (See case study on page 27.) Land remediation is typically 
not an option for existing structures in liquefaction zones or 
development on small lots in a densely occupied area.
In many locations, it is not feasible to alter the land enough to 
eliminate the risk of liquefaction. Instead, new buildings can use 
specially designed foundations, which will reduce the risk and 
typically add less than 10 percent of the total building cost to 
a project. The real challenge is to address the liquefaction risk 
for existing buildings with inadequate foundations. Retrots to 
foundations are difcult, expensive and often not feasible. Typical 
above-ground retrot techniques help increase the resilience of 
structures in liquefaction zones, but they may not be adequate to 
avoid heavy damage.21 Michael Tymoff, Treasure Island Development Authority, discussion on 
October 29, 2012.
26   Report / January 2013
Case Study: Treasure Island, San Francisco, CA
Planning for Liquefaction
Treasure Island, a manmade To reduce liquefaction risk,  to complete before building 
island in the San Francisco a variety of techniques construction can begin.  
Bay, is part of the City of The cost of geotechnical 
San Francisco. The island will be used to stabilize remediation measures is 
was created in the 1930s the islands soils before estimated at $130 million 
by placing landll  mostly construction begins. (in 2010 dollars), or 
sand dredged from various These processes will lower approximately 10 percent of 
map 2013 Googleparts of the bay  onto an 
existing sand shoal. The the ground level, so to all infrastructure costs, which 
includes preparing roads 
island was originally used for the 1939 Worlds Fair and then served compensate, new ll will be and utility systems. Total 
as a naval base. It will be turned over to the City of San Francisco as brought in and the island estimated costs for the entire 
soon as the Navy nishes environmental cleanup efforts.will be raised, which will development are approximately 
also protect against future $5 billion to $6 billion. In 
San Francisco has ambitious plans to redevelop Treasure Island, addition to impacting costs, 
including constructing up to 8,000 new homes, restaurant and retail sea level rise.the islands liquefaction risk 
space, and parkland. However, like most older areas of manmade has played a role in shaping 
ll, Treasure Island has a very high liquefaction risk. The island the design of the future built environment. The northwestern corner 
experienced liquefaction in the 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake, with of the island, which has some of the worst liquefaction risk on the 
differential settlement around much of the island perimeter and major island, is slated to become parkland. 
foundation damage to a handful of buildings. Without remediation, 
liquefaction damage in future earthquakes that are larger and closer Ultimately, this project will result in a new San Francisco neighbor-
could be extreme, with the ground settling as much as 2 feet in hood with world-class views and signicantly lower liquefaction risk 
some areas. This would make buildings unsalvageable and would than the island has at present, helping San Francisco to meet its 
extensively damage roads and underground utilities.housing needs while ensuring a tolerable level of risk. The costs of 
making this land safer, while signicant, are a fraction of the total 
Redevelopment plans include signicant work to reduce liquefaction project costs.
risk. A variety of techniques will be used to stabilize the islands soils 
before construction, such as deep dynamic compaction (where heavy 
weights are dropped on soil to densify it) and vibrocompaction (where 
a vibrating probe is inserted into the soil to densify the surrounding 
soil). This work is easiest in open spaces and more challenging near 
existing buildings. Special techniques will be used in a handful of 
areas adjacent to some of the existing buildings that are not slated 
for demolition. The remediation techniques will consolidate the 
islands soils, lowering the ground level. To compensate, new ll will 
be brought in, and the island will be raised, which will also protect 
against future sea level rise.
SOM
Mitigating liquefaction risk is costly and time-consuming. One of The plan for Treasure Island clusters development to avoid placing 
the compaction techniques, surcharging, requires up to two years buildings in the areas most vulnerable to liquefaction.
                                          Report > January 201327
On  
s Recommendations for Responsible Parties: California State Legislature to fund the 
California Geological Survey and local jurisdictions to implement 
Addressing Earthquake Hazards in provisions of the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act
the 11. Address liquefaction risk in undeveloped areas.
There are a number of large undeveloped or underdeveloped tracts of 
land in the  with high liquefaction risk. Communities should 
10. Complete liquefaction and landslide mapping for take steps to make sure these lands are developed in ways that 
the high-risk parts of the  and ensure that minimize the likelihood of future damage from earthquakes.  
necessary geological investigations are completed in recommends taking the three approaches discussed previously in 
damaged areas following the next earthquake.order to address this risk:
a. Require developers to stabilize the soil prior to building so that it is 
The Seismic Hazards Mapping Act is Californias key law that resistant to liquefaction.
regulates new construction and repair/renovation in liquefaction and b. Require all builders on sites with high liquefaction risk to construct 
landslide zones. As part of this act, the state developed maps for robust foundations or incorporate other structural solutions to 
some densely occupied areas of California, identifying zones with a minimize damage in the event of liquefaction.
high risk of liquefaction and earthquake-induced landslides. Within c. Designate high hazard areas as parks or other low-occupancy 
these zones, new construction projects and major renovations (those uses.
with costs exceeding 50 percent of the value of the structure) must 
conduct a detailed geologic study of their site. The study must be Responsible Parties: Planning and building departments working 
submitted to the local planning or building department, along with a with developers and private homeowners; structural engineers 
description of any mitigation actions that will be taken to reduce the working with project sponsors to communicate benets, costs and 
likelihood of damage due to these hazards. Local jurisdictions must savings
have knowledgeable individuals review these reports for adequacy. 
In addition, when property is sold, the seller is required to disclose 12. Encourage private owners to purchase 
whether a property is located in one of the mapped seismic hazard earthquake insurance.
zones, ensuring that new property owners are informed of their risks 
from the outset. It is clear that this act has signicantly increased Few homeowners purchase earthquake insurance because of high 
the publics knowledge of liquefaction and landslide hazards and annual premiums and deductibles that may never be realized 
has provided a tool that enables communities to require mitigation in an earthquake. Homeowners located in areas susceptible to 
measures in high-risk zones.ground failures such as landslide and liquefaction, however, may 
suffer extensive damage to their homes in an earthquake, making 
In the , the California Geological Survey (CGS) has mapped earthquake insurance a better nancial decision. In addition to 
zones of required investigation, as dened by the Seismic Hazards structural damage, homes may suffer ground displacement that will 
Mapping Act covering San Francisco and parts of Alameda, San have to be addressed before the home can be reoccupied. Some of 
Mateo and Santa Clara counties. However, the rest of the  this land remediation work is covered by an earthquake policy.22
has not yet been mapped.  recommends that the California 
State Legislature fund CGS to complete the mapping of landslide and In California, earthquake insurance underwritten by the state 
liquefaction zones in the high-risk parts of the .through the California Earthquake Authority (CEA) is available to 
owners of single-family homes, condominiums, mobile homes and 
In addition, after the next damaging  earthquake, local apartment buildings with four or fewer units, and to renters to cover 
jurisdictions should make use of the provisions of the Seismic the costs of damage to belongings and temporary relocation. Homes 
Hazards Mapping Act to ensure that adequate studies identify the damaged by liquefaction will be covered for structural damage 
hazard to redeveloped properties. In the past, some owners who have above the deductible and up to the limit. Ground remediation up 
suffered damage to their properties have been exempted from laws to $10,000 is covered, but upgrades and strengthening for future 
like the Seismic Hazards Mapping Act in order to ease their burden earthquakes  such as installation of a mat foundation  are not 
and expedite redevelopment. But exempting owners from conducting covered. Currently, only 10 to 15 percent of  residences are 
appropriate studies to characterize the risks of liquefaction, landslide covered by earthquake insurance. In San Francisco, where residents 
and surface rupture creates a missed opportunity to help jurisdictions disproportionally rent, only about 6 percent of renters take out 
plan for the next earthquake and mitigate against the effects of future earthquake insurance policies.   
disasters.
28   Report / January 2013
Section 2: Earthquake Hazards in the 
CEA-backed earthquake insurance is not available to owners of departments will need to work with professional design associations, 
commercial structures and larger residential buildings. These owners such as the American Institute of Architects, Structural Engineers 
can be covered by earthquake insurance, business interruption Association of Northern California and others to communicate these 
policies and other policies issued by private carriers. While insurance rules to the public as clearly and efciently as possible.
and other types of nancial mitigation do not prevent damage, they 
do allow property owners to avoid nancial catastrophe if their Responsible Parties: Professional associations of planners, architects, 
buildings are impacted, enabling them to repair and rebuild. engineers and historic preservation professionals working closely with 
local building and planning departments; model programs for local 
Responsible Parties: Building and emergency management implementation could be developed at the regional or state level
departments working with realtors, insurance brokers and others 
to increase awareness of the benets of homeowner and renters 
insurance
15. Determine whether rebuilding should not be 
13. Assemble, review and provide critical local allowed in some high-risk areas.
interpretations of regulations governing post-
earthquake building repair and reconstruction, In some cases, a community may feel that the risk of future 
including requirements in multi-hazard areas.liquefaction or other hazards is too high and that the neighborhood 
should be abandoned, at least temporarily, while remediation work 
The current California Building Code (2010 CBC) contains triggers is done. This would require a moratorium on rebuilding. This type 
for post-earthquake repair and retrot that require some damaged of decision is by nature emotionally and politically charged, with 
buildings to be seismically retrotted rather than just repaired if they enormous social implications that juxtapose residents fear of a 
meet a certain damage threshold. Those buildings that experience repeat event with their desire to recover the home they had before 
minimal damage under the dened threshold23 can be returned to the earthquake. The decision to impose a moratorium on rebuilding 
exactly the way they were before the quake. Those that experience would need to take into account the severity and geographic extent of 
damage above the dened threshold need to be seismically improved, damage, the desires of neighborhood residents, and the nancial and 
in addition to being repaired, to make sure they are prepared for social costs of either delaying the return of residents or permanently 
future seismic events. Local jurisdictions can develop interpretive displacing them.
documents to aid in these analyses and determinations, which will 
help avoid substantial delays in reconstruction. Jurisdictions should The decision not to rebuild certain neighborhoods was made in 
consider whether they want different standards in liquefaction Christchurch, New Zealand, after a large earthquake and multiple 
risk zones or other multi-hazard areas that are likely to see repeat aftershocks caused repeated major damage from liquefaction. (See 
damage in aftershocks and future earthquakes. Additionally, local case study on page 31.) As seen in New Zealand, liquefaction, 
governments should provide clear repair standards for buildings that landslides and other earthquake hazards damage not only buildings 
have been damaged but dont trigger the damage thresholds under but also roads, underground pipelines and conduits, and the 
the CBC.many other types of publicly funded infrastructure that make a 
neighborhood function. Communities must decide whether it is a 
Responsible Parties: Professional associations of architects, wise use of public resources to repeatedly repair such infrastructure 
engineers and planners working closely with local building and in a zone that is likely to see more damage.  
planning departments; interpretations could be developed or shared 
at the local, regional or state levelResponsible Parties: Planning departments in consultation with 
building departments, earthquake professionals and impacted 
14. Organize and train teams of professionals to communities; ultimately mayors, city councils or a combination of 
provide expert assistance to property owners and the two will make the nal call
their consultants in post-earthquake technical and 
procedural issues. 
After the disaster, the regulations governing rebuilding may be 22  Source: Janiele Maffei, CEA.
very unclear to property owners. How should buildings be shored? 23  The threshold for retrot after an earthquake in Chapter 34 of the California 
When can buildings be demolished? What are the requirements Building Code is substantial structural damage, which generally means that a 
buildings capacity has been reduced more than 20 percent from pre-damage 
for increased seismic performance for buildings? Are requirements condition. However, the code doesn't say how to determine if that percentage has 
different in secondary hazard zones? Planning and building been met, leading to confusion when this provision of the code is applied.
                                          Report / January 201329
On  
16. Encourage and/or require buildings that are Placing a Moratorium on New Buildings 
rebuilt after an earthquake to be more likely to 
withstand the effects of future earthquakes. Following the 1964 Alaska Earthquake, the Federal Reconstruction 
and Development Planning Commission formed a scientic 
As mentioned earlier, the California Building Code requires structural and engineering task force composed of structural engineers, 
upgrades, rather than simple repairs, when damage reaches certain engineering geologists and seismologists.24 The task force was 
thresholds. This applies to all buildings and occupancies, including charged with evaluating the hazard, making a determination about 
housing, if such damaged buildings are considered to have become the appropriateness of rebuilding in the affected area and advising 
substandard due to structural damage. Local building departments, on needed investments to facilitate rebuilding.
working in coordination with professional groups, should make sure 
that the requirements of the CBC are followed when buildings are Similarly, the City of San Jose established a geologic review panel 
being repaired.in 1994 to evaluate rebuilding decisions related to landslides 
in the hillside portions of the city.25 While the report was being 
At the same time, if buildings are being rebuilt in liquefaction zones developed, the city placed a moratorium on rebuilding in the areas 
or other hazardous areas, the post-disaster period is an opportunity of the city under study. The panel consisted of three engineering 
to complete ground remediation or other hazard abatements, or geologists and two geotechnical engineers. San Jose expects to 
require higher performance of buildings located in these areas. This convene a similar expert panel to guide future redevelopment 
could include mandating that buildings in liquefaction zones have decisions in post-disaster situations.
stronger foundations. Local authorities should strongly consider 
such opportunities to rebuild in ways that increase resilience. After 
signicant liquefaction damage in the Christchurch Earthquakes, 
authorities there developed zones with different kinds of foundation 
requirements.
We should also consider requiring buildings that support disaster 
response to be rebuilt or retrotted in preparation for the next 
event. Such buildings include essential facilities such as hospitals, 
emergency shelters and residential structures. 
Responsible Parties: Building departments in coordination with 
planning departments and professional associations
24  William Spangle and Associates, Inc. 1980. Land Use Planning After 
Earthquakes.
25  City of San Jose, East Foothills Moratorium Area Geologic Review Panel 
Report, March 1994.
30   Report / January 2013
Case Study: Christchurch, New Zealand
Choosing Whether to Rebuild in the Face of Ongoing Hazards
In late 2010 and early 2011, Commission (EQC), offers natural disaster insurance coverage 
the City of Christchurch and for residential properties, similar to our National Flood Insurance 
the Canterbury region of New Program (NFIP) and California Earthquake Authority (CEA) policies. 
Zealand experienced a series But unlike a CEA policy, an EQC policy covers costs for land 
of severe earthquakes that damage due to earthquakes, landslides and several other natural 
caused repeated and heavy hazards. Thus, the EQC conducts land damage assessments of 
damage from liquefaction. insured properties as part of its claims process. Due to the scale 
With close to 475,000 and extent of land movements after the September 4 and February 
map 2013 Googlepeople, the Canterbury region 22 earthquakes, the EQC commissioned a three-step process to 
is the second-largest metropolitan area in New Zealand and the major understand the severity of land damages both on the plains and in 
economic center of the countrys South Island. The rst in this string the hills: rst, broad-scale regional mapping; second, rapid property-
of earthquakes occurred on September 4, 2010, when a magnitude by-property mapping of land damage patterns; and third, more 
7.1 earthquake struck 25 miles west of the city center and only detailed land damage assessments for insurance claim settlements on 
6 miles underground.26 Around 25,000 residential properties individual properties.30 Aerial photography and LIDAR (light detection 
experienced liquefaction, rockfalls and other signicant land and ranging technology) were combined with borehole drilling, core-
movements that also damaged neighborhood streets and portions of pressure testing and other subsurface investigations to characterize 
the water, wastewater and storm-water drainage systems.27 Local the regional issues, while a team of 400 engineers conducted the 
and regional planning agencies had previously mapped many of the detailed land damage assessments.31
affected areas, predicting moderate to high liquefaction potential. The 
extent of the liquefaction, therefore, didnt come as a surprise, given These studies, combined with the building damage inspection data, 
the degree of the ground shaking.formed the basis of the national governments decision to zone all 
residential properties in the Canterbury region as either suitable or 
On February 22, 2011, the city was struck by a magnitude 6.3 unsuitable for rebuilding. On June 23, 2011  10 days after the 
earthquake on a previously unmapped fault that was only 4 miles June 13 aftershock and just four months after the most damaging 
from the city center and 3 miles underground.28 Though smaller earthquake  a new national cabinet known as the Canterbury 
in magnitude, this earthquake caused far greater damage than Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA) released detailed maps 
the September earthquake. More than 180 people were killed, classifying residential properties in the Canterbury region into four 
Christchurchs business district suffered two dramatic building zones: green, red, orange and white.32
collapses and nearly half of the districts buildings were deemed 26  EERI (Earthquake Engineering Research Institute). The Mw7.1 Dareld 
uninhabitable. This time, nearly 65,000 residential properties (Canterbury), New Zealand Earthquake of September 4, 2010. EERI Special 
experienced liquefaction, rockfalls and other signicant land Earthquake Report, insert to EERI Newsletter, vol. 44, no. 11, November 2010.
movements.2927  EQC. Canterbury Earthquakes 2010 and 2011, Land Report, February 29, 
2012.
Surrounding roads, water and wastewater pipes, electric lines and 28  EERI. The M 6.3 Christchurch, New Zealand Earthquake of February 22, 
storm-water drainage systems were also heavily damaged. The 2011, EERI Special Earthquake Report, insert to EERI Newsletter, vol. 45, no. 
5, May 2011
aftershocks continued, with another damaging quake on June 
29  EEQC. Canterbury Earthquakes 2010 and 2011, Land Report, February 
13, 2011, causing additional liquefaction and building damage 29, 2012.
and raising serious concerns about the future viability of the many 30  Ibid
residential neighborhoods that experienced repetitive land and 31  Ibid
building damages.32  CERA. Greater Christchurch Recovery Update, Newsletter of Canterbury 
New Zealands national government, through its Earthquake Earthquake Recovery Authority, no. 15, November 2012.
                                          Report / January 201331
tGreen zones were deemed suitable for rebuilding, although these land and buildings by the EQC and other insurers. Authorities are also 
zones were further subdivided into three technical categories still considering how to value the residential red zone land that the 
with varying foundation and building standards for repair and government has bought and what will be done with the land. 
reconstruction of housing (see below).  
tRed zones were deemed unsuitable for reconstruction because land For the green zone areas, New Zealands Department of Building and 
repair would be prolonged and uneconomic.Housing is setting the standards for repairs and reconstruction:
tOrange and white zones required further assessments.tTechnical Category 1 (TC 1) areas are those locations where future 
land damage from liquefaction is unlikely and ground settlements 
At the same time, the national government also announced a are expected to be within normally accepted tolerances. For new 
package to buy insured residential properties in the red zones, construction, standard foundations are acceptable subject to 
offering two options: 1) the government buys the property at a shallow geotechnical investigations. The TC 1 zones are generally 
price based on the most recent tax valuation for the land and in the far western areas of the regions, where ground elevations are 
improvements and takes over all insurance claims for the property; higher and water tables are lower. 
or 2) the government buys the property at a price based on the most 
recent rating valuation for the land only and takes over the EQC tTechnical Category 2 (TC 2) areas are those locations where 
claim for land damage only while the owner retains the benet of all minor to moderate land damage is possible in future earthquakes. 
insurance claims for building damage.33In TC2 areas, all new housing construction and all foundation 
repairs to existing housing must be built in accordance with one 
The red zone offer is voluntary, and owners of properties are under of three standard foundation designs developed by a group of 
no obligation to accept it, but it is not yet clear what will happen design professionals and adopted by the local jurisdiction. There 
if property owners choose not to sell.34 No decisions have been may be added construction costs for these foundation designs 
made on the future of the land in the residential red zone, although compared to pre-earthquake design requirements, but the process 
the national government has stated that local governments will not is relatively straightforward and does not require additional geologic 
be installing new utility services in these zones. There are added investigations, which can add substantial time and costs to both 
uncertainties about the availability of insurance and reconstruction repairs and new construction. 
nancing and about future resale values for those who do not 
sell. Under the Canterbury tTechnical Category 3 (TC 3) areas are those locations where 
The national government Earthquake Recovery Act moderate to signicant land damage from liquefaction, including 
2011, the national government lateral spreading, is possible in future large earthquakes. 
decided to zone all could at a future time require Foundation solutions must be based on site-specic geotechnical 
residential properties in the property owners to sell their investigations and specic engineering foundation design. These 
Canterbury region as either property for its market value, areas are generally closer to the river or in areas that experienced 
suitable or unsuitable for which could be lower than the extensive land damage in the recent earthquakes. In addition, the 
current offers.roads and utility systems servicing the TC 3 areas require special 
rebuilding, then offered a conguration and design.
package to buy properties As of October 29, 2012, 
in the red zones, where 7,860 properties have been The national government issued its zone decisions to provide 
rebuilding would not be zoned red.35 Additional studies certainty for homeowners and their insurers about whether 
allowed.conducted since June 2011 properties could be rebuilt, allowing buildings owners to make 
have reclassied all of the decisions and move forward with their recovery.38 Similarly, the 
orange and most of the white 
zone properties as either red or green. Fewer than 200 homeowners 33  New Zealand Ofce of the Auditor General. Roles, Responsibilities, and 
await a reclassication from white to either red or green. More than Funding of Public Entities After the Canterbury Earthquakes, Parliamentary 
Paper, October 2012.
6,180 residential red zone properties (about 79 percent of the total) 
34  Ibid
have accepted the governments buyout offer.36 On September 13, 
2012, the national government also extended offers to purchase 35  CERA. Greater Christchurch Recovery Update, Newsletter of Canterbury 
Earthquake Recovery Authority, no. 15, November 2012.
vacant land and insured commercial properties inside some of the 36  Ibid
residential red zones. The national government estimates that the 37  New Zealand Ofce of the Auditor General. Roles, Responsibilities, and 
total costs over the next two years to buy and manage the residential Funding of Public Entities After the Canterbury Earthquakes, Parliamentary 
red zone lands will be NZ$678 million (US$556 million).37 It Paper, October 2012.
expects to recover some of these costs from the benets paid on the 38  CERA. Brieng for the Incoming Minister, December 2011.
32   Report / January 2013
Tao LaiSri Sritharan
Department of Building and Housing stated that the technical Downtown Christchurch was decimated by the second of two major 
categories helped reduce uncertainty and enabled roughly 80 percent earthquakes to hit the region in less than a year (above right). 
of property owners to conduct repairs without detailed geotechnical Many parts of the region experienced very severe land damage 
investigations that would have caused further delay to the rebuilding (above left), raising questions about which areas were safe to 
process.39rebuild and which were not.
Christchurch offers many lessons for  communities. First of means that there is a risk of neighborhood decline and added blight in 
all, by charging a lead agency with investigating land damage, the TC 3 areas.
government was able to assemble a comprehensive and consistent 
view of the liquefaction and ground failures relatively quickly. Because Over the long term, Christchurch will need to decide what happens 
New Zealands national government underwrites insurance and also to its red zones. Can they ever be reoccupied, or should they 
funds repairs to damaged public facilities and infrastructure, it faced become permanent open space? Engineers suggest that once the 
a hefty bill to repair damage while still assuming the risk of additional red zones are cleared of all houses, liquefaction mitigation could 
losses from future earthquakes. In the , our governments may be implemented over the entire area to make it suitable for housing 
be left with a similarly high bill because so few of our property owners again. Such mitigation techniques, which include grouting and soil 
carry any insurance, and local governments  together with insurers, consolidation, can only be applied effectively to large areas of vacant 
the state and FEMAs Public Assistance Program  also fund repairs land. Similarly,  communities may need to take the lead in 
to damaged public facilities and infrastructure. Due to the potential decreasing the risk of liquefaction before allowing rebuilding, or they 
for repeated losses from aftershocks or other hazards, it may be more may decide to convert vulnerable areas to permanent open space.40
cost-effective to restrict rebuilding in some areas and offer buyouts to 
damaged property owners. 
While the risk of future hazards has been signicantly reduced for 
New Zealands government and residents, some new risks and 
uncertainties arise from these policy actions. While most owners 
have accepted the governments buyout offer, some have not. For 
those who choose to stay in their homes, the government has not 
yet conrmed whether infrastructure and community services will 
continue in their neighborhoods. Lawsuits challenging specic aspects 
of the governments decisions are making their way through the 39  New Zealand Department of Building and Housing. 2012. What Do the 
courts. Red zone residents are having trouble nding comparably Technical Categories Mean for You? Transcript of Dave Kelly, director of the 
priced homes with the money they expect to receive from the Canterbury Rebuild of the Building and Housing Group, www.dbh.govt.nz/
government buyout. The areas population is shifting, and urban canterbury-earthquake-technical-categories-video
planning has not had a chance to keep up. Some areas are seeing 40  Other references for this case study include the following:
t-BVSJF+PIOTPO
"*$1
QFSTPOBMDPNNVOJDBUJPO
+VMZ

signicant population growth without the adequate road systems and t.BSLIBN
4JNPOi5IF$ISJTUDIVSDI&BSUIRVBLFT
o
%JTBTUFS
utility networks to serve the new communities. Other long-populated Recovery and Land Use Planning: An Urban Edge Perspective, PowerPoint 
areas are now vacant, creating crime and vandalism concerns. The presentation at , San Francisco, CA, April 11, 2012.
required geotechnical investigations and foundation designs in the ti#SPXOMFFA4UFQQFE0VUTJEF-FHBM-JNJUT
w5IF1SFTT
+VMZ

QSFTT
co.nz
TC 3 areas are expensive, but resale values are unclear. All of which t$ISJT1PMBOEJOUFSWJFXXJUI.JLF+BDLBPG5POLPOBOE5BJMPSJO"VHVTU
                                          Report / January 201333
On  
Section 3 
Implementing Recovery:  
How Regulations and Land Use Tools 
Can Help, or Hinder, Rebuilding  
35 Environmental Review
38 Redevelopment
40 Non-Conforming Uses
41 Historic Preservation
42 Affordable Housing
34   Report / January 2013
After a disaster, local governments will work to develop 
a vision for recovery that includes making decisions ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
about which areas to rebuild according to existing Most planning actions in the  require environmental review. 
plans and codes, which ones to re-plan and how to do There are two umbrella regulations that could affect  
it. jurisdictions: the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and 
the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). We use the term 
To carry out this recovery vision, private property owners will need umbrella because NEPA and CEQA review often encompasses 
to know the rules that govern rebuilding, such as whether or not review of other environmental regulations that may apply to the 
rebuilding their property requires environmental review, whether project.41 These include requirements under the Clean Water Act, the 
or not they will be allowed to rebuild structures that do not meet Clean Air Act, the Endangered Species Act and the National Historic 
current codes and whether or not they can substantially alter historic Preservation Act.42
buildings. Local governments will have to answer the same questions 
when considering the rebuilding of public property and infrastructure. Both NEPA and CEQA pose challenges in the recovery period. The 
To do so, they must be aware of existing state and federal regulations environmental review procedures of these acts can often take a long 
that impact these types of decisions and must consider how these time and thus may not work well in post-disaster recovery, when 
regulations might change in the post-disaster period. improvements need to happen quickly. For large projects  including 
new neighborhood plans and infrastructure replacement plans 
Certain types of regulations, such as those laid out in the California that do not simply replicate what existed before the disaster  the 
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and National Environmental Policy preparation of full environmental impact statements (EISs) under 
Act (NEPA), contain specic exemptions that apply in a post-disaster NEPA or environmental impact reports (EIRs) under CEQA could be 
period. Others, like those protections specied in historic preservation required. Preparing and adopting an EIR or EIS can take years, even 
law, offer guidance for how to deal with historic resources after an under non-disaster conditions. Such a lengthy process could pose 
earthquake. Still other parts of state law, such as the section that substantial problems after a major disaster.  
allows for the creation of reconstruction authorities in the wake of a  
major earthquake, provide tools that can be used only following a However, both NEPA and CEQA contain statutory and categorical 
disaster. exemptions that local jurisdictions may be able to use to support 
disaster mitigation, response and recovery activities in the wake of a 
At the same time, complex planning challenges will have to be natural disaster such as a major earthquake:
addressed. What tools will we need in the post-disaster period to 
aid the recovery of areas that have been severely damaged? What Statutory exemptions/exclusions are reserved for those actions that 
role might reconstruction authorities play now that California has are exempted by law (statute) from environmental review. They are 
eliminated its state redevelopment agencies? How do we preserve generally more difcult to challenge than categorical exemptions  
affordable housing to prevent permanent economic displacement because a reviewing court will typically only need to determine 
after a disaster? whether the project actually qualies for the exemption based on 
substantial evidence in the public record. 
This section addresses the following regulatory and planning issues:
t &OWJSPONFOUBMSFWJFXCategorical exemptions/exclusions differ from statutory exemptions/
t 3FEFWFMPQNFOUexclusions because they are created by regulation, not by 
t /PODPOGPSNJOHVTFTBOETUSVDUVSFTstatute. They cover classes of actions that generally do not have 
t )JTUPSJDQSFTFSWBUJPOa signicant impact upon the environment. Unlike statutory 
t "GGPSEBCMFIPVTJOHexemptions, categorical exemptions may not be invoked if certain 
exceptions apply. For example, categorical exemptions/exclusions 
The regulations and planning issues outlined in this section are may not be used if there is a reasonable possibility that the project 
enormously complex. Books can be written on all these topics (and could result in a signicant impact on the environment due to 
have been). Our list is not exhaustive, as the number of regulatory unusual or extraordinary circumstances.
challenges that local governments will face is enormous. What 
we have attempted to do is to identify the core issues that most 
jurisdictions are likely to face and to briey describe each issue and 41  Luther, Linda. Implementing the National Environmental Policy Act 
the way it could impact recovery in the post-disaster period. We then (NEPA) for Disaster Response, Recovery and Mitigation Projects, Congressional 
Research Service, 7-5700, February 3, 2010.
make recommendations for what should be done now, before the 
42  The National Historic Preservation Act requires federal agencies to consider 
disaster, as well as steps jurisdictions should take after the disaster to the effects of proposed federal undertakings on historic properties. This is known 
effectively manage each issue.   as a Section 106 review.
                                          Report / January 201335
On  
NEPAt1PUFOUJBMGPSTJHOJmDBOUDVNVMBUJWFJNQBDUXIFOUIFQSPQPTFE
action is combined with other past, present and reasonably 
NEPA is a federal law that applies only when an activity involves foreseeable future actions, even though the impacts of the proposed 
federal money or a federal agency action, regardless of whether action may not be signicant by themselves45
it was undertaken by the federal, state or local government or by 
private individuals. There are two key ways that NEPA review may be The regional administrator of FEMA decides whether a FEMA action 
required in the disaster recovery context. First, NEPA can be triggered is subject to NEPA review or whether it receives a categorical or 
when federal funds help cover the costs of preparing for a disaster statutory exemption. Sometimes such determinations (or at least a 
or making repairs to disaster-damaged buildings and infrastructure. process for making such determinations) can be made in advance 
Examples include FEMA funding for disaster planning efforts and of a major disaster, which reduces confusion and delay in the 
Department of Transportation funding for state and local highway post-disaster period. Agreeing to a plan ahead of time is particularly 
repairs after an earthquake. Second, NEPA can be triggered by the important when different federal agencies have different interests and 
need for a permit or approval from a federal agency. For example, provide conicting NEPA guidance. 
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers must issue permits for repairs 
that occur in bodies of water, and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Fortunately, weve seen some examples of successful interagency 
must approve the reconstruction of damaged buildings in areas with cooperation, including the programmatic agreement executed by 
federally listed threatened or endangered species or vegetation.FEMA, the California State Historic Preservation Ofcer (SHPO) and 
the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP), which created 
In an emergency, NEPA review can be avoided or expedited so that a streamlined post-disaster review process for FEMA activities that 
funds can be spent and approvals issued without lengthy delay. might impact historic resources.   
The Stafford Act (the legislation that authorizes disaster assistance) 
creates several statutory exclusions from NEPA for emergency actions, CEQA
which include providing assistance to individuals and families for 
food and housing, and restoring roads and other infrastructure to If NEPA does not apply to a project, environmental review may 
their pre-disaster condition.43 Emergency life-saving actions are nonetheless be required under CEQA. CEQA is a California state law 
also covered under a statutory exclusion. If an action is statutorily that applies to a public agencys decision to carry out, authorize 
excluded, the project is not subject to NEPA review.or approve a project that could have a negative impact on the 
environment. The following is a summary of several statutory 
Federal regulations44 require that each federal agency create exemptions from environmental review under CEQA46 that could 
its own NEPA-implementing procedures that are unique to apply after a natural disaster such as a major earthquake.47
that agencys purpose. Accordingly, in addition to the statutory 
exclusions authorized by the Stafford Act, FEMA has adopted several The rationale behind CEQAs emergency statutory exemptions is 
categorical exclusions for actions that FEMA has determined have similar to the rationale behind NEPAs statutory exclusions: In a 
no signicant effect on the environment. If an action is categorically disaster situation, it may be justiable to authorize a project that 
excluded, environmental review may still be required if extraordinary responds to an emergency without completing a potentially lengthy 
circumstances are found to exist. The following is a list of environmental review process.
extraordinary circumstances identied by FEMA:
t(SFBUFSTDPQFPSTJ[FUIBOOPSNBMMZFYQFSJFODFEGPSBQBSUJDVMBSThe so-called disaster exemption applies to projects to repair, restore, 
category of actiondemolish or replace buildings or facilities damaged or destroyed in a 
t"DUJPOTXJUIBIJHIMFWFMPGQVCMJDDPOUSPWFSTZmajor disaster, as long as a state of emergency has been declared by 
t1PUFOUJBMGPSEFHSBEBUJPO
FWFOJGTMJHIU
PGBMSFBEZFYJTUJOHQPPS
environmental conditions
t1SFTFODFPGFOEBOHFSFEPSUISFBUFOFETQFDJFTPSUIFJSDSJUJDBM43  See 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)  10.8(c)(1)-(2). See also www.
habitat or of archaeological, cultural, historical or other protected fema.gov/environmental-planning-and-historic-preservation-program/femas-
resourcesstatutory-exclusions, accessed on October 25, 2012.
t1SFTFODFPGIB[BSEPVTPSUPYJDTVCTUBODFTBUMFWFMTUIBUFYDFFE44  40 C.F.R. Parts 15001508.
federal, state or local regulations or standards requiring action or 45  List of extraordinary circumstances, www.fema.gov/environmental-
attentionplanning-and-historic-preservation-program/femas-categorical-exclusions, 
t"DUJPOTXJUIUIFQPUFOUJBMUPBEWFSTFMZBGGFDUTQFDJBMTUBUVTBSFBTaccessed October 25, 2012.
or other critical resources such as wetlands, coastal zones, wildlife 46  The statutory exemptions under CEQA Guidelines Section 15269 should be 
reviewed carefully by legal counsel on a case-by-case basis, along with any other 
refuge and wilderness areas, wild and scenic rivers, sole or potentially applicable statutory or categorical exemptions.
principal drinking water aquifers47  Please see CEQA Guidelines Section 15300 et seq. for information about 
t1PUFOUJBMGPSBEWFSTFFGGFDUTPOIFBMUIPSTBGFUZpotentially applicable categorical exemptions.
36   Report / January 2013
Section 3: Implementing Recovery
the governor under the Emergency Services Act.48 If the project being also the Historic Preservation section on page 41) will require a 
considered by the public agency is a comprehensive community clear denition of imminent threat. The denition in the California 
recovery plan that encompasses more than the repair or replacement Historical Building Code (or a similar denition) would be appropriate 
of property or facilities damaged in a disaster (e.g., general for this purpose. 
infrastructure improvements and economic revitalization measures), 
this exemption may not apply.Responsible Parties: Governors Ofce of Planning and Research and 
secretary for the California Natural Resources Agency
The disaster exemption is also limited under state historic resource 
preservation law.49 If the project involves the demolition or signicant 19. Amend CEQA to allow for a delayed review of 
alteration of a building that is a designated historic resource  i.e., it plans adopted within the boundary of major disaster 
is listed on a national, state or local historic register  the exemption areas under the jurisdiction of local reconstruction 
may only be used if the building poses an imminent threat50 of 
bodily harm or damage to adjacent property or, possibly, if the authorities. 
demolition or signicant alteration is authorized by the State Ofce of 
The Community Redevelopment Disaster Project Law provided 
Historic Preservation.
that CEQA review may be delayed until after the adoption 
of a redevelopment plan following a disaster, as long as the 
There are other statutory exemptions that could apply in an 
redevelopment plan qualies under the law and other enumerated 
emergency situation, including those covering emergency repairs to 
requirements are met. This same CEQA relief should be provided 
facilities necessary to maintain services essential to public health, 
in areas under the jurisdiction of reconstruction authorities. As 
safety or welfare; seismic work on certain highways and bridges; 
discussed in the Redevelopment section on page 38, enacting this 
and actions necessary to prevent or mitigate an emergency before 
recommendation may also require amending the Disaster Recovery 
it happens.51 Notably, long-term projects to prevent or mitigate a 
Reconstruction Act of 1986. 
situation that has little chance of occurring in the short term are 
not exempt under CEQA. There must be a true emergency  i.e., a 
Responsible Parties: California State Legislature in coordination with 
sudden, unexpected event involving a clear and imminent danger and 
the governor
a need for immediate action.52 There is also an exemption for repair 
of certain critical state levees, which will sunset in 2016 unless that 
date is extended.5320. Create a CEQA exemption for seismic mitigation 
projects for buildings. 
s Recommendations for This exemption is currently limited to certain highways and bridges. 
Environmental Review recommends that it be expanded to cover buildings seeking to 
do mitigation as well. 
Responsible Parties: California State Legislature in coordination with 
the governor
17. Review execution of intergovernmental/inter-
agency agreements such as the one between FEMA 
and the SHPO for issues specic to the  
to ensure that environmental review occurs as 
efciently as possible. 
48  See Government Code Section 8550 et seq. See CEQA Guidelines Section 
15269(a).
Responsible Parties: Planning departments in consultation with the 49  Codied in Public Resources Code Section 5028.
California Emergency Management Agency and FEMA50  While this term is not dened under CEQA, imminent threat is dened 
 in the California Historical Building Code as any condition within or affecting 
18. Amend the CEQA guidelines to clarify that the a qualied historical building or property which, in the opinion of the authority 
denition of imminent threat is the same as or having jurisdiction, would qualify a building or property as dangerous to the 
extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public, its occupants or those 
similar to the denition in the California Historical performing necessary repair, stabilization or shoring work are in immediate peril 
Building Code.due to conditions affecting the building or property.
51  See CEQA Guidelines Section 15269 for a more detailed discussion of these 
and other statutory exemptions.
Applying the CEQA emergency exemption to projects that propose 52  See the denition of emergency under CEQA Section 21060.3.
the demolition of signicant alteration of listed historic resources (see 
53  See CEQA Section 21080.12.
                                          Report / January 201337
On  
REDEVELOPMENT
21. Assess whether recovery actions are statutorily In previous disasters in California, redevelopment agencies played 
or categorically excluded under NEPA.  a role in facilitating recovery. Now that California redevelopment 
agencies have been dissolved, the state has lost the capacity to 
If an action may be categorically excluded, planning departments create new redevelopment areas and to expedite the adoption 
should conrm with FEMA that undertaking the action would not be of redevelopment plans in the wake of a disaster. Californias 
accompanied by extraordinary circumstances subjecting the action community redevelopment law previously enabled local governments 
to NEPA review. to create post-disaster redevelopment agencies with the power to 
use tax increment nancing to rebuild infrastructure and  private 
Responsible Parties: Planning departments in consultation with development and with the power to assemble parcels, sometimes by 
FEMAinvoking eminent domain. The Community Redevelopment Disaster 
Project Law expedited this process in the wake of a disaster.54
22. Make use of the emergency exemptions under 
CEQA for covered projects.This disaster law allowed local governments to quickly establish a 
redevelopment agency and adopt a redevelopment plan under two 
Applicable CEQA emergency exemptions are described above. conditions: 
1. The governor declared that the plan area was in need of 
Responsible Parties: Planning departmentsassistance.
2. The plan area was within a presidentially declared major disaster 
23. Seek funding to rapidly complete neighborhood area. 
plan program-level EIRs (if such plans are developed) 
so that individual projects can work under that The Community Redevelopment Disaster Project Law also provided 
broader, program-level EIR (or possibly qualify for a that CEQA review could be delayed until after the adoption of 
a redevelopment plan following a disaster, as long as certain 
community plan exemption). requirements were met. This streamlined process has also been lost 
now that redevelopment agencies no longer exist.
Responsible Parties: Planning departments
The Powers of Redevelopment
Under Californias now-defunct redevelopment law, redevelopment 
agencies had certain land use and taxation powers. These powers 
could be very helpful in aiding recovery of areas hard hit by a 
major earthquake. They included:
Tax Increment Financing  A method of public nancing that 
uses future growth in the assessed valuation of property, and 
the resulting increases in property taxes, to pay for current 
improvements that are projected to lead to such increases in 
assessed valuation. Prior to the states decision to eliminate 
community redevelopment agencies in 2011, tax increment 
nancing funded a wide variety of public/private redevelopment 
and infrastructure projects. 
Parcel Assembly  The process of acquiring several small, 
contiguous lots to make one larger parcel of developable land.
Eminent Domain  The power to take private property for public 
54  See California Health and Safety Code Section 34000 et seq.use following the payment of just compensation to the owner of 
55  See Government Code Section 8877.18877.6.that property.
56  See Government Code Section 81808194.
38   Report / January 2013
Section 3: Implementing Recovery
Fortunately, a separate provision of state law55 allows for the creation of the same powers that redevelopment agencies used to have, 
of reconstruction authorities with powers parallel to those of a including the power to use tax increment nancing in reconstruction 
community redevelopment agency, except that the reconstruction areas.
authority would be authorized to operate beyond the connes of 
designated redevelopment areas and would have nancing sources Responsible Parties: The California State Legislature in coordination 
other than tax increment sources. This section is known as the with the governor
Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction Act of 1986.
25. Prepare a recovery plan that includes a 
But it is unclear what powers these reconstruction authorities would streamlined procedure for modifying general plans 
have, if any, since community redevelopment agencies no longer and zoning ordinances, as well as any other local 
exist. Would they have the authority that redevelopment agencies 
used to have? Or would they have no powers, since community authorizations needed for the activities referenced in 
redevelopment agencies have been dissolved and successor agencies the recovery plan.
are reduced to winding down the affairs of the former redevelopment 
agencies?This recovery plan can be codied in the recovery and reconstruction 
ordinance drafted in advance of the disaster. 
This law needs to be amended to be more explicit about the powers 
available to reconstruction authorities now that redevelopment Responsible Parties: Planning departments 
agencies have been dissolved. One option is to model reconstruction 
authorities on the Capitol Area Development Authority (CADA) 
legislation.56 CADA is an existing joint powers authority with the 
same powers that community redevelopment agencies used to have, 26. Where needed, create new reconstruction 
including the ability to utilize tax increment nancing. CADA was not authorities and adopt disaster recovery plans to aid 
struck down with the rest of redevelopment law and could serve as areas suffering from major damage. 
a reference point for clarifying the specic powers of reconstruction 
authorities.Jurisdictions should determine appropriate ways to nance the 
activities of the reconstruction authority, including public and private 
Additionally, the Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction Act empowers funding sources. If tax increment nancing is needed, cities will need 
local authorities to create recovery and reconstruction plans (prior to to establish a reconstruction authority with powers to generate tax 
a disaster) that would enable: increment nancing.
1.  Evaluations of the vulnerability of specic areas to damage from a 
potential disasterResponsible Parties: Planning departments; city councils and boards 
2.  Streamlined procedures for modifying existing general plans or of supervisors to establish reconstruction authorities
zoning ordinances affecting vulnerable areas after a disaster
3.  Contingency plans of action and organization for recovery after a 
disaster, including reconstruction  
s Recommendations for 
Redevelopment
24. Amend the Disaster Recovery and 
Reconstruction Act to clarify the powers, including 
public and private nancing tools, that a recovery 
authority would have in the post-disaster period. 
Now that redevelopment agencies have been dissolved, no new 
redevelopment areas can be created in the wake of a major disaster. 
The California State Legislature should amend the Disaster Recovery 
and Reconstruction Act to provide reconstruction agencies with some 
                                          Report / January 201339
On  
NON-CONFORMING USES s Recommendations for  
Non-Conforming Uses
Often, a previously allowable use of property continues to exist in 
an area where the zoning has changed. For example, sometimes 
industrial operations persist in a neighborhood now zoned only for 
residential use. These are known as non-conforming uses. In other 27. Develop a policy to determine when non-
cases zoning changes and code upgrades can create certain rules 
for new development that existing development does not meet (such conforming and non-complying uses can be rebuilt. 
as requirements to provide a certain amount of parking per unit, a 
certain building setback, a certain bedroom size, etc.). The pre-One possibility is to follow San Franciscos example and allow the 
existing buildings are called non-complying structures.reconstruction of non-conforming and non-complying uses as long 
as construction complies with building code requirements and 
After the disaster, if the existing codes do not already specify, commences within a certain period of time. 
planners and building ofcials will need to decide whether to allow 
owners to rebuild non-conforming uses and non-complying structures Responsible Parties: Planning and building departments
or whether to require owners to meet current zoning and building 
codes. Most likely, they will have to make these decisions in the 28. Develop local procedures to assure that the 
face of enormous pressure to let owners rebuild what existed before post-earthquake repair and retrot requirements 
the disaster and to waive planning and building requirements to the of the California Building Code are met, including 
extent allowed by state law. the appropriate collection of building damage 
information. 
Dealing with non-conforming uses and non-complying structures 
is going to be one of the key challenges in the post-disaster period. Responsible Parties: Building departments
Requiring owners to build to current standards will likely increase the 
seismic resilience of the entire city. However, funding for the repair 
and replacement of private structures may not be sufcient to cover 
the entire cost of upgrading a structure to current standards. This 29. Implement local procedures to assure that the 
may lead private owners to choose not to reinvest in their properties. post-earthquake repair and retrot requirements of 
 the California Building Code are met.
San Franciscos Approach to Non-Conforming UsesResponsible Parties: Building departments
In San Francisco, non-conforming uses destroyed by an act of 
God may be rebuilt, subject to certain restrictions. The rebuilt 
structure must be permitted by the building department, and 
construction must commence within 18 months and thereafter 
be diligently prosecuted to completion. Generally, such rebuilt 
structures must meet current building and re codes. They may 
also include an intensication of use (such as more housing units 
or more commercial space built on the same site), as long as that 
intensication is allowed under the current planning code and 
does not increase the non-compliance of the structure. 
As mentioned in Section II of this report, the California Building 
Code requires seismic improvement, rather than simple repair 
to pre-earthquake condition, for buildings that have been 
substantially damaged. San Francisco has adopted regulations 
that clarify those requirements. 
40   Report / January 2013
Section 3: Implementing Recovery
HISTORIC PRESERVATIONin the Environmental Review section, imminent threat should be 
clearly dened. Many historic preservation battles in the post-disaster 
period have focused on the interpretation of this term.
After a disaster, many historic buildings may be damaged, as may 
buildings that are not listed as historic resources but that add to 
community character. In the post-disaster period, it will be difcult s Recommendations for 
to sort out which buildings are critical to preserve even if they have 
sustained substantial damage. Policy-makers will need to weigh the Historic Preservation
importance of the resource against the degree of the damage and 
consider the impact of aftershocks, which may harm the resource 
even more and pose additional safety concerns.
30. Complete survey work to help clarify which 
If policy-makers are too quick to issue demolition permits, valuable buildings are historic resources and which are not. 
historic resources could be lost. The good bones and ne character  Complete the process of designating individual 
that many historic buildings provide can serve as anchors for historic resources and historic districts before a 
re-planning neighborhoods that experience major damage after an disaster occurs.
earthquake. In instances where too many historic resources are de-
stroyed in favor of new development, the character of neighborhoods Local jurisdictions should complete the planning work needed 
can erode. At the same time, delaying demolition can lead to potential to determine which buildings are most valuable from a historic 
safety hazards, especially if aftershocks occur. Denying demolition  perspective prior to a major earthquake. It will be much harder to 
permits without providing resources for historic rehabilitation can make such decisions in a deliberative manner after an earthquake 
delay recovery if buildings are boarded up for long periods of time.has occurred.
Emergency Repair or Demolition?Responsible Parties: Planning departments
After an earthquake, local building departments will evaluate 31. Encourage the retrot of historic structures so 
properties and tag buildings based on their level of damage. A green that they will be able to withstand an earthquake.
tag means no unsafe conditions have been found. A yellow tag 
indicates restricted use, meaning a building either requires further Responsible Parties: Planning and building departments in 
evaluation or is okay to occupy except for designated areas. A red tag coordination with historic preservation groups
means a building is currently not safe to occupy.
Local jurisdictions will have to make a decision about red-tagged 32. Work with local historic preservation groups 
buildings. They can require emergency shoring, barricading or or plan to assemble a team of historic preservation 
emergency demolition, or they can mandate that the building be professionals to survey damaged buildings and 
repaired or demolished following adopted permit procedures. provide advice to local governments and property 
If a building is a designated historic resource (e.g., it is listed on owners about which buildings must be preserved and 
a national, state or local historic register) or a potential historic which can be altered or demolished.  
resource (e.g., it is determined to be eligible for the national or state 
register), then, unless the project is exempt, the building may only be Responsible Parties: Planning and building departments in 
demolished or signicantly altered if the impact is evaluated. Typically, coordination with historic preservation groups
demolition or signicant alteration would result in a signicant 
unavoidable environmental impact under CEQA, in which case the 33. Compile information on nancial incentives for 
decision-making body would have to adopt a nding that the benets retrotting historic resources before the disaster and 
of the project outweigh the impact (referred to as a statement of 
overriding considerations) in order to authorize the project.57nancing the repair of historic resources after the 
disaster.
As discussed in more detail in the Environmental Review section, 
a disaster exemption could apply in the wake of a natural disaster, Responsible Parties: Planning departments
in which case even a listed historic resource could be demolished 
without CEQA review if the building poses an imminent threat of 57  See CEQA Guidelines Section 15043.
bodily harm or damage to adjacent property (or, possibly, if the SHPO 58  See California Public Resources Code Section 5028. Note that if FEMA is 
authorizes the demolition or signicant alteration).involved in funding the demolition, FEMA would need to ensure compliance with 
58 As explained NHPA before the demolition, regardless of whether there is a CEQA exemption.
                                          Report / January 201341
On  
38. Identify sources of funds and provide other 
incentives to help private owners rehabilitate their 
34. Ensure that building departments coordinate historic properties after an earthquake. 
with planning departments and historic preservation 
professionals when determining which damaged Responsible Parties: Planning departments in coordination with 
historic buildings present an imminent threat to historic preservation groups
public safety.
Planning departments and historic preservation professionals AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
may have input regarding such buildings that would lead building 
departments to consider recommending that a building be shored Housing is linked to every aspect of a citys recovery: Businesses, 
until it could be rebuilt, as opposed to demolished. neighborhood districts, schools and cultural institutions all rely on 
residents being able to stay in their jurisdiction after a disaster. If 
Responsible Parties: Building departments in coordination with people can remain in their homes, they will be better able to put their 
planning departmentsenergy and resources into rebuilding their neighborhoods. If they 
leave the city, they may not return, and recovery may be substantially 
35. Work with local historic preservation groups and delayed. 
historic preservation professionals to survey damaged 
historic buildings and advise owners about how to Low-income households are disproportionately impacted by disaster. 
While wealthier households can relocate for awhile and make use 
shore up damaged buildings. of private resources to rebuild their homes, low-income families 
may need to rely more heavily on public resources during the period 
After the Northridge Earthquake, historic preservation groups immediately following a disaster, and they may require additional 
(including the Historic Resources Group, the Los Angeles help with long-term recovery. 
Conservancy, Hollywood Heritage and the American Institute of 
Architects Historic Resources Committee) worked with city ofcials Exacerbating the discrepancy, in some areas low-income households 
to help cross-reference a list of damaged buildings with listed are more likely to live in housing thats vulnerable to earthquake 
historic resources. Historic preservation groups attempted to identify damage, including units that are rent-controlled or naturally 
the owners of damaged historic buildings and provide them with affordable because they have not been well maintained, theyre 
information on how to shore up and stabilize those buildings in the located in low-income neighborhoods or theyre small (e.g., single-
near term, as well as how to repair the buildings in the longer term. room occupancy units). In San Francisco, some rent-controlled 
housing lies in liquefaction areas. Many rent-controlled buildings 
Responsible Parties: Historic preservation groups in coordination with have not been properly retrotted, partly because rent control law 
planning and building departments  prevents landlords from passing on the cost of certain types of 
retrots to tenants. 
36. Clarify to the public that a red tag is not an order 
to demolish a property. In other parts of the region, such as the ats of the East Bay, 
low-income households live in areas susceptible to liquefaction and 
Responsible Parties: Building departmentsin housing that may not withstand an earthquake. If large swaths of 
low-lying liquefaction-prone areas experience signicant damage after 
37. Identify funds for shoring up buildings until a a major earthquake, it may be difcult to encourage private owners, 
determination regarding demolition and alteration particularly owners of multifamily housing, to rebuild. Even if housing 
can be made. is rebuilt, there is no guarantee that the people who lived there before 
will return.
FEMA may reimburse cities for the temporary shoring and 
stabilization of damaged buildings and for demolition that might be Permanently affordable subsidized housing is much more likely to 
required if there is an immediate threat to life, public health and fare well after a disaster. Typically, this type of affordable housing is 
safety.owned by a socially motivated nonprot that is trying to both preserve 
the building and serve low-income households over time. Providers 
Responsible Parties: Planning departments in coordination with of affordable housing often invest in strengthening their buildings 
historic preservation groupsthrough rehabilitation projects. After a disaster, they will continue to 
serve low-income populations. However, many affordable housing 
42   Report / January 2013
Section 3: Implementing Recovery
providers dont have sufcient earthquake insurance due to the 42. Work with developers and managers of 
expense and the fact that this type of insurance does not provide affordable housing nationally to determine the 
substantial coverage. After a disaster, affordable housing providers viability of establishing a private insurance pool 
may need additional assistance to repair and rebuild.
Much of the regions public housing (housing owned and managed to capitalize or purchase less expensive hazard 
by the federal government through local housing authorities) insurance. 
was built quickly and inexpensively in the 1950s and 60s. 
Governmental authorities have repeatedly cut funding over the past Responsible Parties: Local governments in coordination with 
several decades, which has signicantly delayed the upkeep and developers and managers of affordable housing and California 
maintenance of these buildings. It is unclear how this housing will Housing Finance Agency 
perform in a major earthquake.  
s Recommendations for 43. Include affordable housing as part of any post-
Affordable Housingdisaster damage assessment, and ensure that areas 
that are being re-planned after a disaster include 
affordable housing. 
39. Develop programs to make seismic upgrades When determining what resources will be needed to rebuild after a 
to dangerous building types that house low-income disaster, jurisdictions should be sure to include affordable housing 
people so that low-income households can stay in as part of the request for federal recovery funding. At the same time, 
their homes after an earthquake.   if new reconstruction authorities are established with the power to 
raise tax increment nancing, some of that nancing should pay for 
affordable housing uses. Under Californias previous redevelopment 
Building types to focus on include multifamily soft-story buildings legislation, 20 percent of tax increment nancing went to affordable 
(i.e., those with garage doors or other large openings on the ground housing uses. 
oor), unreinforced masonry buildings and other types of structurally  
unsound housing. Funding will be needed to support these efforts.  Responsible Parties: Building, planning, nance and community 
development departments, mayors ofces of housing 
Responsible Parties: Planning and building departments 
40. Rebuild public housing through federal programs 
such as Hope VI or local programs such as San 
Franciscos HOPE SF Program.  
Cities should nd ways to rehabilitate public housing that is not 
being rebuilt through HOPE VI or other programs. 
Responsible Parties: Mayors ofces of housing or community 
development departments in coordination with affordable housing 
developers
41. Convert private multifamily housing that houses 
low-income people to nonprot ownership through 
acquisition/rehabilitation strategies.
Responsible Parties: Mayors ofces of housing or community 
development departments in coordination with affordable housing 
developers
 
                                          Report / January 201343
Case Study: New Orleans, LA
Post-Disaster Planning to Manage Risk
On August 29, 2005, management and focused instead on restoring the neighborhood 
Hurricane Katrina housing, infrastructure and quality of life lost in Katrina. 
overwhelmed New Orleans 
levees and ooded the By early summer 2006, it became clear that these and other 
city, affecting 80 percent previous planning efforts lacked either the political support or 
of its land area and almost the comprehensiveness of other parish recovery plans that were 
230,000 homes and being submitted to the Louisiana Recovery Authority.64 BNOB had 
map 2013 Googlereducing its pre-disaster produced a high-level (albeit controversial) framework for rebuilding, 
population of 455,000 and the Neighborhoods Rebuilding Plan provided a more detailed 
to less than 200,000 in subsequent months.59 In the storms set of recovery plans for a portion of the citys neighborhoods. In 
immediate aftermath, there was a widespread recognition that addition, many neighborhoods were continuing to organize and 
ambitious, long-range planning was necessary to address both the undertake planning efforts of their own, with the assistance of 
post-disaster recovery needs and the myriad, seemingly intractable universities and consultants throughout the country.
problems that had plagued the city prior to the storm.60
Finally, in late August 2006, New Orleans mayor, City Council 
New Orleans mayor responded by convening an ad hoc commission, and City Planning Commission (CPC) and the Louisiana Recovery 
the Bring New Orleans Back (BNOB) Commission, that devised Authority signed a memorandum of understanding to support the 
a series of high-level plans in January 2006 to address a full development of a new plan, the Unied New Orleans Plan (UNOP). 
spectrum of recovery and community improvement issues.61 By far Funding for UNOP came mainly from the philanthropic community. 
the most controversial of these was the Urban Planning Committee New Orleans CPC staff helped design the ve-month UNOP process, 
report, which endorsed the idea of shrinking the citys footprint and which took a two-tiered approach to planning from the start.65 A 
replacing certain low-lying neighborhoods with green space.62 The citywide planning team had two key charges: to assess the more 
report also recommended that more detailed neighborhood-based systemic citywide recovery needs, such as infrastructure recovery, 
planning be conducted to evaluate the long-term viability of heavily and to unify the previous and ongoing planning efforts into one 
damaged neighborhoods. This next phase of the BNOB process did 
not materialize, as funding and political support for the controversial 59  Olshansky, Robert B., and Laurie A. Johnson. 2010. Clear as Mud: 
document faltered, but the concept of neighborhood-based planning Planning for the Rebuilding of New Orleans. Chicago, IL and Washington, DC: 
endured. American Planning Association.
60  Johnson, Laurie A., and Raphael Rabalais. Planning for Post-Disaster 
In the spring of 2006, the New Orleans City Council stepped into Rebuilding: An Update from New Orleans  An Invited Comment. Natural 
Hazards Observer, May 2007.
the post-BNOB planning void and funded a neighborhood-based 61  Nagin, Ray, and Bring New Orleans Back Commission. 2006. Rebuilding 
effort, called the New Orleans Neighborhoods Rebuilding Plan, New Orleans, Final Summary, www.bringneworleansback.org
through the end of the summer of 2006.63 This process focused 62  Olshansky, Robert B., and Laurie A. Johnson. 2010. Clear as Mud: 
on the immediate needs of the hardest-hit neighborhoods  those Planning for the Rebuilding of New Orleans. Chicago, IL and Washington, DC: 
in low-lying areas  which made up slightly more than half of the American Planning Association.
citys ofcially recognized 73 neighborhoods. Essential to the plans 63  Lambert Advisory LLC and Shedo LLC. 2006. City of New Orleans 
recommendations was an assumption that 100-year ood protection Neighborhoods Rebuilding Plan, Summary.
would be provided expeditiously to the entire city and future ood 64  Johnson, Laurie A., and Raphael Rabalais. Planning for Post-Disaster 
Rebuilding: An Update from New Orleans  An Invited Comment. Natural 
risk would be reduced to a more acceptable level. In contrast to Hazards Observer, May 2007.
the BNOB plans, the New Orleans Neighborhoods Rebuilding Plan 65  UNOP (Unied New Orleans Plan). 2007. Citywide Strategic Recovery and 
contained few recommendations for hazard mitigation and ood-risk Rebuilding Plan, Final Draft. 
44   Report / January 2013
Laurie Johnson 
comprehensive Citywide Strategic Recovery and Rebuilding Plan. To effectively represent the demographics of pre-Katrina New 
Another group of planning consultants worked at the district level, Orleans, the UNOP simulcast its second community congress 
constructing recovery plans for each of the citys 13 planning (pictured) in other cities, reaching displaced residents living in 
districts (administrative areas delineated by the CPC during the Dallas, Houston, Atlanta and Baton Rouge.
1980s). Consultants were selected through a national request for 
qualications process overseen by a panel of national planning neighborhood stabilization, housing, infrastructure, public facilities 
experts. Citizens and neighborhood groups also had input into the and public services. Throughout the process, the planning teams 
selection of the district planning consultant teams.maintained a top-down and bottom-up interaction that, coupled 
with the broad citizen input, helped establish recovery scenario 
Both the citywide and district teams followed a similar three-preferences and principles for the plans.67
phase process: First, they conducted a comprehensive recovery 
assessment; second, they developed and selected their recovery The UNOP plans focus on a strategic recovery framework and 
scenario preferences; and third, they constructed recovery plans work to balance citizens preferences with two key risks that could 
and a prioritized list of undermine the citys future and any recovery investments: the pace 
recovery projects.66 Appendix of repopulation and the risk of future ooding.68 As of January 
Community congresses were 2 provides a list of sectors 2007, only half of New Orleans pre-Katrina population had returned, 
simulcast in New Orleans, analyzed on a citywide basis, but forcibly shrinking the citys footprint to respond to a smaller 
Houston, Dallas and as well as the neighborhood population was not a politically palatable option. The plan proposed 
Atlanta to include residents assessment guidelines used by that the phasing of infrastructure and public facilities investment 
the district teams. reect post-Katrina population shifts. Through public investment 
displaced by the storm. decisions and direct nancial assistance to residents and businesses, 
Residents shared their views The UNOP process also had the plan aimed to boost the recovery of repopulating areas and 
on what was best for the an extensive communications to promote the clustering of residents who reside in areas slow to 
city as a whole and voted on component, including repopulate. In all, the citywide plan identied 95 priority recovery 
newsletters, media relations, projects totaling more than $14.3 billion to be completed over a 10-
priorities for ood protection, neighborhood meetings and year period.69 These projects represented the gaps in both the public 
neighborhood stabilization, other innovative strategies to and private funds already allocated toward New Orleans recovery. As 
housing, infrastructure, address the unique conditions of January 2007, roughly $40 billion in public and private funds had 
public facilities and public of the project. District planners either been obligated or already spent in New Orleans. But the vast 
services. held four rounds of meetings majority of this funding was directed toward emergency assistance 
in each planning district during and the short-term needs of individuals and property owners; 
four designated weekends. a relatively small portion of federal assistance went to longer-term 
Three citywide community congresses brought together between rebuilding activities such as housing and infrastructure restoration.70
300 and 2,500 New Orleanians (both those living locally and 
66  Ibid 
those still displaced by the storm) to provide input into the citywide 
planning process. The second and third community congresses were 67  Johnson, Laurie A., and Raphael Rabalais. Planning for Post-Disaster 
Rebuilding: An Update from New Orleans  An Invited Comment. Natural 
conducted as simulcast meetings in New Orleans, Houston, Dallas Hazards Observer, May 2007.
and Atlanta, with many others linked via the Internet at libraries and 68  UNOP (Unied New Orleans Plan). 2007. Citywide Strategic Recovery and 
other meeting sites across the country. In these congresses, residents Rebuilding Plan, Final Draft. 
from a variety of neighborhoods shared their views on what was best 69  Ibid
for the city as a whole and voted on priorities for ood protection, 70  Ibid
                                          Report / January 201345
In December 2006, New Orleans mayor created an Ofce of about safer long-term rebuilding. Billions of dollars must be invested 
Recovery Management (ORM) to coordinate and direct recovery in wetlands restoration, systematic levee rebuilding, home elevation 
efforts. While the UNOP review was underway, the ORM developed and other forms of hazard mitigation to make New Orleans safer in 
a recovery planning implementation vision, which it released on the long run. Massive blight and signicant ood risk remain the 
March 29, 2007.71 The City of New Orleans Target Area Plan regions major challenges.79 
identied 17 recovery zones in business corridors around the city 
where public recovery funds would be used to fund repair and 
reconstruction of key public facilities and infrastructure in an effort 
to  redevelopment and private investments in these areas and 
also enhance quality of life.72 The target areas were determined 
by the ORM and CPC staff and based on previous planning efforts, 
most notably the neighborhood 
As of January 2007, only stabilization and clustering 
half of New Orleans pre-programs and policies 
Katrina population had recommended in the UNOP 
citywide and district plans.73
returned, but forcibly 
shrinking the citys footprint The ORM and CPC staff 
to respond to a smaller packaged the Target Area Plan 
population was not a and the UNOP plans into 
the New Orleans Strategic 
politically palatable option.Recovery and Redevelopment 
Plan, which the City Council 
approved on June 21, 2007.74 Then, on June 25, the Louisiana 
Recovery Authority approved the same plan as the ofcial recovery 
plan for the parish of Orleans and also ofcially received UNOP as 
the foundation for the Orleans Parish recovery plan and characterized 
it as representing a citizen-driven recovery vision for the entire city of 
New Orleans.75
In October 2007, the ORM merged with other city agencies to 
become the Ofce of Recovery Development and Administration 
(ORDA). It continued its focus on developing and bundling recovery 
programs and funding until it was dissolved in 2010. The New 
Orleans Redevelopment Authority also has had a major role in 
post-disaster recovery, leading a comprehensive blight-reduction 
strategy for the city and working with the states recovery authority to 71  City of New Orleans. 2007. Ofce of Recovery Management Target 
Areas. 
receive, manage, package and resell properties sold to the state as 72  Ibid
part of Louisianas post-Katrina housing repair program.76 The city 
73  CPC (City Planning Commission). 2007. Consideration of the Citywide 
also instituted many governmental reforms recommended by UNOP Strategic Recovery & Rebuilding Plan, Final City Planning Commission 
and other recovery planning efforts, including the preparation and Report.
adoption of a new master plan and comprehensive zoning ordinance, 74  Olshansky, Robert B., and Laurie A. Johnson. 2010. Clear as Mud: 
which are now guiding recovery and revitalization.  Planning for the Rebuilding of New Orleans. Chicago, IL and Washington, 
DC: American Planning Association
The city has continued to face scal challenges in managing its 75  LRA (Louisiana Recovery Authority). 2007. A Resolution to Approve 
Orleans Parish Community Recovery Planning.
operating expenses while also raising the necessary capital to fund 
76  City of New Orleans. 2010. Blight Strategy.
recovery.77 Meanwhile, the 2010 census conrmed that New 
Orleans population was still nearly 30 percent below its 2000 level. 77  City of New Orleans. 2010. 2011 Annual Budget.
However, rebuilding may have helped the city maintain a relatively 78  Brookings Institution. 2011. Resilience and Opportunity Lessons from 
the U.S. Gulf Coast After Katrina and Rita. Washington, DC: Brookings 
low unemployment rate throughout the nationwide recession and oil Institution.
spill crisis.78 New Orleans continues to face tremendous uncertainty 79  Ibid
46   Report / January 2013
Section 4 
Financing:  
The Fuel for Disaster Recovery  
                                          Report / January 201347
On  
Money is the fuel for disaster recovery: It largely Losses from the 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake have been estimated 
determines what gets rebuilt and when. Even if at more than $6 billion in property damages and $960 million 
communities engage in rigorous efforts to develop in insured losses (in 1989 dollars).81 Although Santa Cruz and 
Watsonville were devastated, the urban core of the  was 
comprehensive recovery and rebuilding plans before largely spared, with heavy damage in San Francisco and Oakland 
a disaster strikes, implementing the plans is always limited to pockets where the effects of amplied ground shaking 
contingent on funding.  and liquefaction were particularly pronounced. Current estimates 
suggest that a repeat of the 1989 earthquake would cost $38 billion 
Some of the potentially signicant nancing challenges that  in economic losses and $3.6 billion in insured losses.82 This loss is 
communities are likely to face after a disaster include: still far less than the projected costs of the most likely ruptures on the 
t %FUFSNJOJOHSFCVJMEJOHQPMJDJFTBOEmOEJOHUIFOFDFTTBSZGVOETHayward or San Andreas faults. 
to remediate ground failure areas, particularly areas impacted by 
liquefaction and slope failures The Northridge Earthquake, which struck Los Angeles in 1994, 
t .BOBHJOHCMJHIUJOBSFBTXJUIIFBWZDPNNFSDJBMPSSFTJEFOUJBMdamaged more than 100,000 housing units and left 20,000 people 
damage, particularly areas that are still heavily impacted by the homeless. Residential losses totaled $20 billion and accounted for 
foreclosure crisis and older commercial centers that were already nearly half of the total property damages and associated losses of 
in decline$41 billion.83 Private insurance also paid for half of all residential 
t 'VOEJOHBOZTJHOJmDBOUSFDPOTUSVDUJPOBOESFEFWFMPQNFOUlosses.84 In the San Fernando Valley, where the earthquake 
efforts, including infrastructure, government centers, medical and was centered, approximately 60 percent of all homeowners had 
educational facilities, and private developmentearthquake insurance.85 As described below, this level of earthquake 
insurance coverage far exceeds current levels in California.
Financing disaster recovery is particularly challenging when a   
community aspires to rebuild in ways that do not conform to pre-
disaster conditions. Insurance policies and federal disaster recovery Availability of Financial 
assistance programs, such as FEMAs Public Assistance Program 
insurance, are not always exible enough to allow for alternatives Resources for Recovery
or improvements that meet a communitys desires. If a community 
decides to use the post-disaster window of opportunity to implement Planning for post-disaster recovery may involve land use changes 
improvements or rebuild in a more resilient way, it will need to and new building standards that improve on pre-disaster conditions. 
engage a wide range of public and private stakeholders and resources Implementing such decisions requires a good working knowledge of 
 and then package and apply those resources in new and creative the nancial resources that stakeholders can offer, as well as their 
ways.  willingness to stay in the jurisdiction and contribute to the community 
  recovery. If funding is not available or if it cannot be readily accessed 
The s Disaster and used to meet individual and community needs, the recovery may 
stall and people and businesses may decide to move elsewhere. A 
Financing Problemsustainable community recovery calls for a mix of private and public 
nancing sources. 
In the wake of a major earthquake in the , disaster-impacted Private-Sector Resources
cities will face major long-term challenges in obtaining recovery 
funding. Studies show that the cost to rebuild damaged housing, Private-sector resources include the contributions of individuals and 
businesses and infrastructure following a magnitude 7 earthquake businesses, insurance payments, donations and funding available 
on the Hayward Fault (similar to the one that occurred in 1868) from private nonprot and charitable organizations.  
would likely exceed $100 billion; following an event similar to the 
magnitude 7.9 earthquake that occurred on the San Andreas Fault in In most areas of the United States, insurance is a foundational 
1906, this cost would likely exceed $150 billion.80element of a communitys disaster recovery. However, Californians 
are signicantly underinsured against the risk posed by earthquakes. 
Californias most recent signicant earthquakes  specically, There are 1.15 million residential earthquake policyholders in 
the 1989 magnitude 6.9 Loma Prieta and 1994 magnitude 6.7 California, representing only 11.3 percent of California homeowners 
Northridge earthquakes  had far smaller impacts than the (see Figure 3), and most of the policies have high deductibles and 
earthquakes described above and are not good models for evaluating other limits and constraints on coverages.86 Commercial properties, 
whether we have the resources to rebuild. particularly small businesses, are also underinsured. Unless there 
48   Report / January 2013
Section 4: Financing
Figure 3: How Many Californians Have Earthquake Insurance?
Although it is almost certain that a major earthquake will occur in California in the next 30 years, 
residents are not purchasing earthquake insurance. In part, this is because earthquake insurance is very 
expensive and the deductibles are quite high. Absent private insurance, most California homeowners 
will be looking to the public sector and their own pocketbooks for the resources to rebuild after the next 
major earthquake. 
Total Commercial Lines  6.87%   Percentage of Insurance   
   Policies With Earthquake 
Total Residential MarketTotal Homeowners Market 11.30%   Peril Coverage
Total Rental Market 5.85%
Total Condominium Market 18.09%
Total Mobile Home Market 15.07%
Source: State of California, Department of Insurance, Earthquake Premium and Policy Count Data Call, 2011.
are major market reforms, insurance will be a limited resource after organizations do provide resources for recovery, ranging from 
future  earthquakes. immediate repairs to homes to funding for long-term investments 
in housing, schools, infrastructure and other critical elements of 
Donations are a signicant component of post-disaster nancial the communitys well-being. Communities are often challenged to 
assistance, particularly early on after a disaster, when media attention manage donations effectively. The volume of donations, particularly 
is high. Nongovernmental organizations, private nonprot entities, immediately after a disaster, can overwhelm the communitys 
faith-based organizations, foundations and businesses provide both systems for receiving the donations and channeling them to meet 
material and nancial assistance to individuals, families, community needs appropriately. In some cases, local governments and other 
organizations and local governments. Much of this assistance is community organizations may not have the authority or means to 
focused on the immediate needs created by the disaster, but some accept and use donations.  
80  Kircher, Charles A., Hope A. Seligson, Jawhar Bouabid, and Guy C. Morrow. Private investment will ultimately be required for recovery. Residents, 
2006. When the Big One Strikes Again: Estimated Losses Due to a Repeat of 
the 1906 San Francisco Earthquake. Earthquake Spectra 22 (Special Issue II): property owners, retailers and businesses must decide that it is 
S297S339; RMS (Risk Management Solutions, Inc.). 2008. 1868 Hayward worth the risk to invest in rebuilding. In addition to contributing 
Earthquake: 140-Year Retrospective, www.rms.com/Publications/1868_their own resources, they must be able to secure nancing for their 
Hayward_Earthquake_Retrospective.pdfplans, which means that nancial institutions must also decide that 
81  RMS. 2009. Catastrophe Modeling and California Earthquake Risk: investment in the community is worth the risk. It is critical that a 
A 20-Year Perspective. RMS Special Report, www.rms.com/publications/
LomaPrieta_20Years.pdfcommunity develop momentum and foster condence in recovery 
82  Ibidso that residents, businesses and nancial institutions tip in and 
decide to add their own resources. Often, private investment will 
83  Petak, William J., and Shirin Elahi. 2001. The Northridge Earthquake, USA 
and Its Economic and Social Impacts. Laxenburg, Austria: International Institute wait until public investment occurs  that is, homeowners and 
for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), www.iiasa.ac.at/Research/RMS/july2000/others will not take steps to rebuild until repairs to infrastructure 
Papers/Northridge_0401.pdfand public facilities, such as neighborhood schools, are visibly 
84  City of New Orleans. 2007. Ofce of Recovery Management Target Areas, underway. This may be particularly true in communities that plan 
www.cityofno.com/portal.aspx?tabid=95to make improvements or rebuild differently. Private entities may be 
85  Comerio, Mary. 1998. Disaster Hits Home: New Policy for Urban Housing reluctant to support or engage in redevelopment if it appears that 
Recovery. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
the redevelopment will not have adequate funding or will languish in 
86  State of California, Department of Insurance. 2011. Department of 
Insurance, Earthquake Premium and Policy Count Data Call.lengthy delays.
                                          Report / January 201349
On  
Local Government ResourcesAssistance Program). Other federal and state assistance programs 
would also likely kick in, such as programs to repair damaged 
In the most severely affected communities, local governments highways and provide low-interest loans to homeowners and small 
will be overwhelmed by the disaster. The extraordinary demands businesses. Figure 4 shows typical assistance programs that are 
of responding to the earthquake will exceed available resources, available following a major disaster and the more common direct and 
requiring signicant state and federal assistance. The local indirect recipients of these different resources.
governments workforce will be disrupted by facility damage, the 
displacement of workers and a lack of funding to sustain government Existing state and federal government assistance programs do 
operations. The earthquake will also impact the local economy, not always provide resources that are required or desired. Often 
reducing tax receipts and the availability of resources for long-the funding doesnt come quickly enough and requires extensive 
term recovery. Additionally, public coffers may already be limited application processes. Simply put, most of this money doesnt just 
given the economic downturn of recent years and the loss of some ow; it has to be granted, which means that jurisdictions have to 
key nancing mechanisms, such as redevelopment funds. See le project worksheets for Public Assistance, applications for FEMA 
"Redevelopment" section on page 38. These factors may prevent our Hazard Mitigation Grant Program funds and action plans for U.S. 
regions local governments from leading a sustainable community Department of Housing and Urban Development funding. Some 
recovery and from implementing any improvements to rebuilding.programs require signicant state and local matching funds and 
have other conditions and requirements that must be met. As a 
Some communities create new revenue streams to make up for result, there will be bottlenecks at the state and federal levels in both 
their post-disaster funding shortfalls and facilitate recovery. For processing and managing these program streams.
example, following the 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake, the voters 
of Santa Cruz County and the countys cities approved a 0.5 to 1 Working with state and federal government assistance programs may 
percent transaction and use tax to help nance capital improvements be particularly challenging when community recovery means more 
and public projects related to earthquake recovery.87 However, a than simply restoring buildings and infrastructure to pre-disaster 
communitys ability to pass such measures depends heavily on the conditions. Communities may raise many questions in designing 
timing of election cycles and the willingness of two-thirds of the and implementing recovery strategies. Is it really cost-effective to 
electorate to approve the new taxes.repair public infrastructure just as it was? Should certain pieces of 
infrastructure be rebuilt differently? Are there opportunities to improve 
State and Federal Disaster Assistanceor replace existing buildings or systems that are aging or obsolete? 
Are there private-sector buildings and infrastructure for which the 
Recovery-related funding from the state and federal governments public sector should provide funding? Many assistance programs 
is primarily intended to supplement community resources to repair are not sufciently exible to accommodate these considerations. 
damaged public infrastructure and facilities. State and federal funds It is possible that the earthquake would have such a severe and 
that go directly to the private sector have traditionally provided widespread impact that it would trigger state and federal legislation 
assistance in the form of loans for small businesses and funds for approving supplemental funding to meet the longer-term challenges 
temporary housing and replacing damaged contents and goods. of rebuilding housing, infrastructure and local economies. But getting 
The massive impact of a major  earthquake will require a this legislation passed  and ensuring that it provides enough 
signicant level of state and federal government assistance. This also funding  is not guaranteed.
means that these levels of government will play a central role in the 
s recovery. The sheer volume of local governments, public Ultimately, the s communities will need to work 
districts, nonprots and other qualifying agencies applying for these collaboratively and creatively with each other, state and federal 
funds will cause delays in the timing and delivery of assistance.partners, local residents and businesses, and other investors and 
philanthropic organizations to craft a sustainable recovery vision and 
In the event of a major  earthquake, the governor would assemble the necessary funding to achieve it.
declare a state of emergency and also request, and almost 
immediately receive, a presidential disaster declaration. This triggers We make the following recommendations to help ensure that the 
assistance under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency regions constituents are in the best position to receive available 
Assistance Act, our nations primary legislation for disaster assistance. disaster recovery resources and obtain new resources to assist in the 
Under this authority, the federal government can mobilize federal rebuilding effort following a major disaster.
resources to assist with response and recovery, provide funding to 
reimburse public agencies for the cost of emergency response and 
to repair publicly owned buildings and infrastructure (FEMA Public 
Assistance Program) and assist individuals and households with 87  Santa Cruz Public Libraries. 2012. 1990 November General Election, Local 
Ballot Measures, www2.santacruzpl.org/ref/measures/index.php?PID=36&PHP
housing and immediate needs (FEMA Individual and Household SESSID=7fe20c8c6b91977412085e9e54774038&sr=15&pp=5&cp=4
50   Report / January 2013
Section 4: Financing
Figure 4: How Recovery Funding Is Distributed
Funding for recovery comes from a variety of sources, including the federal government through the 
Stafford Act, the countrys primary program for disaster assistance. Some funding is distributed directly 
to businesses and residents. Some goes to state and local governments for repairing public facilities and 
infrastructure, mitigating future disaster risk and other community improvements. Other sources ow to 
state and local governments for distribution to recipients further down the funding chain.88
State Local Businesses 
Governments Governments and Residents
Federal Stafford Act FEMA* individual assistance programs
Programs
FEMA public assistance grants
FEMA hazard mitigation grants
Other Federal FEMA community disaster loans
Programs
HUD** community development disaster
recovery block grants
HUD housing vouchers
Small Business Administration loans
Economic Development Administration grants
Department of Transportation grants 
Non-Federal State assistance
Sources
Local government assistance
Private insurance
Nonprot assistance
* Federal Emergency Management AgencyDistributor
** Department of Housing and Urban Development
Direct recipient
Indirect recipient
88  Johnson, Laurie A. 2009. Developing a Management Framework for Local 
Disaster Recovery: A Study of the U.S. Disaster Recovery Management System 
and the Management Processes and Outcomes of Disaster Recovery in 3 U.S. 
Cities, dissertation submitted in partial fulllment of the doctoral degree, School 
of Informatics, Kyoto University.
                                          Report / January 201351
On  
s Recommendations for for applying for assistance, know the steps to adapt the program 
to community-specic needs, understand how much (or how little) 
Financing exibility there is to meet those needs and develop a plan for executing 
reconstruction work using grant funds. In general, the program pays 
to restore facilities to pre-disaster condition; however, there are options 
that allow local governments and other qualifying agencies to modify 
44. Develop a comprehensive disaster recovery facilities to meet post-disaster circumstances. Local agencies should 
nancing plan. understand how program requirements and limitations can affect 
funding for planned improvements or new facilities; the program may 
As described above, the federal government has a wide range of not provide funding for elements of a community-wide recovery plan 
programs to provide disaster assistance to individuals, families, state or changes that are driven by land use planning if they are not related 
and local governments, and private nonprot entities. These programs to repairing damaged facilities. Additionally, grants for facility and 
supplement assistance that is available from the state. Additionally, infrastructure restoration require that local governments and federal 
state and federal legislation may provide supplemental funding to agencies provide up to 25 percent of the funding for the project 
meet disaster-specic needs that are not readily addressed by existing themselves. Local governments and qualifying agencies must develop 
programs. Local governments should: plans to provide their part of the funding.
t "TTFTTUIFMJLFMZJNQBDUTPGBOFBSUIRVBLF
JODMVEJOHIPXMPDBM
government income streams would be affected by a disaster89Responsible Parties: Finance departments (or the lead local 
t &WBMVBUFXIBUBTTJTUBODFJTBOEJTOUBWBJMBCMFGPSLFZBSFBTPGagencies responsible for municipal nance) in coordination with city 
recoverymanagers ofces, departments of emergency management and 
t %FWFMPQBQMBOBOENFDIBOJTNGPSUBLJOHUIFTUFQTOFDFTTBSZUPother key local agencies
maximize opportunities for assistance, and implement training for 
staff who would be responsible for plan implementation46. Develop and adopt mechanisms to receive 
monetary and material donations. Actively seek 
Plans need to ensure in advance that the community has adequate resources from state and federal funders, the 
resources to fund likely repairs and rebuilding, as well as the philanthropic community and private investors. 
increased capacity necessary to meet the demands and pace of post-
disaster recovery. This assessment should take into account those The  Urban Areas Security Initiative (UASI) has developed 
elements of recovery that require changes in land use, represent a regional donations management plan that leverages public-private 
signicant or long-term improvements to facilities or systems and do partnerships for post-disaster donations management on both the 
not readily t within existing state and federal government assistance regional and local levels. Under the plan, a local foundation acts 
programs. Local governments should identify ways to address these as the scal agent to receive monetary donations, which are then 
elements (e.g., by integrating disaster recovery needs into local disbursed to qualied service providers by a donations coordination 
capital improvement programs and working with state disaster team comprised of nonprot and faith-based organizations. Local 
assistance program managers to determine the exibility of grant governments should be familiar with and adopt the UASI donations 
programs to meet these needs.)management plan and facilitate a collaborative effort among 
foundations, nonprots and faith-based organizations in their 
Responsible Parties: Finance departments (or lead local agencies communities. Local governments should also invest in systems such 
responsible for municipal nance) in coordination with city as AidMatrix, which manages material donations and connects them 
managers ofces, departments of emergency management, with donors, or should establish agreements with foundations that 
planning departments and other key local agenciesalready have similar tools.
45. Develop and sustain procedures and staff skilled The City and County of San Francisco has launched a disaster 
in applying for and receiving FEMA Public Assistance recovery fund that enables it to accept tax-deductible monetary 
Program funds.  89  Hazus  a GIS-based loss estimation software that is publicly available 
from FEMA  has been used by agencies to estimate likely damage levels to 
Local and regional government agencies and other governmental buildings, lifelines and other components of the built environment. It is also 
entities can use Public Assistance Program funds to repair or replace used to estimate social and economic losses resulting from selected scenario 
earthquake-damaged buildings and infrastructure. FEMA has earthquakes, hurricanes or oods that most closely represent the event that just 
occurred. It can also be a very useful planning tool for considering the local 
produced detailed guidance for this program. In order to maximize the damages and costs of various scenario earthquakes.
benets of the program, it is imperative that local governments and 90  Wallace Bajjali, Development Partners. Redevelopment Project Update: 
other qualifying public and nonprot agencies identify the procedures Joplin City Council Presentation, presented at the Joplin City Council, October 
15, 2012, www.joplinmo.org/DocumentCenter/View/1298
52   Report / January 2013
Section 4: Financing
be used to foster community economic development goals after a 
Public-Private Partnerships (P3s)disaster. In particular, it is important to know what projects different 
programs will and will not cover. For example, in 1989, federal 
P3 arrangements can provide private capital and operational government assistance programs would not have paid to replace 
resources to the recovery process. In the United States, P3 the Embarcadero Freeway with the surface street and public transit 
arrangements are becoming more prevalent as state and local features that were eventually built in its place without signicant 
governments seek ways to address infrastructure challenges when waivers. But federal post-disaster hazard mitigation funds could 
public funding resources are increasingly scarce. The replacement be used to reinforce damaged civic buildings in San Francisco and 
of San Franciscos Doyle Drive with the Presidio Parkway illustrates Oakland and help stimulate renewal in surrounding neighborhoods. 
how a P3 arrangement can accelerate a critical infrastructure 
project considerably. The project involves up-front private Communities often have plans to rehabilitate aging or obsolete 
investment, which has allowed the state to leverage its available features or to replace vulnerable buildings or infrastructure with more 
funding. The management structure has reduced the states risks resilient facilities; these plans should address how these activities 
of cost overruns and schedule delays, and it provides a guaranteed could be implemented or accelerated in the event of an earthquake.
plan for maintenance for a certain period of time. 
Responsible Parties: Economic development departments (or 
The City of Joplin, Missouri, has entered into a P3 arrangement, lead local agencies responsible for economic development) in 
hiring a master developer to help rebuild its convention center coordination with planning and public works departments and other 
complex, performing arts complex, clusters of affordable housing key local agencies
and other portions of the city that were destroyed by a tornado on 
May 22, 2011. The agreement includes a dozen potential projects, 48. Incorporate seismic hazards and upgrade needs 
valued at nearly $800 million, with nancing plans that involve a into capital improvement plans. 
mix of federal and state disaster programs, tax increment nancing 
from the citys redevelopment district, other government tax credits, Cash-strapped local governments are increasingly pressured to 
private investment and long-term debt.90delay major capital upgrades, and any available funds for capital 
improvement are more likely to pay for routine maintenance. Given 
the high likelihood of a major earthquake striking the region in the 
donations online. The fund, established under the San Francisco next 30 years, local capital improvement plans should give high 
Administrative Code, has received legal and legislative review and priority to seismic reviews, retrot and upgrades. These projects may 
contains strict provisions for its use, enabling San Francisco to be eligible for different and separate nancing schemes.
quickly access funds following a disaster while other sources of 
assistance trickle in.Responsible Parties: Capital planning and public works departments 
(or lead local agencies responsible for capital improvements 
Responsible Parties: Finance departments (or lead local agencies planning) in coordination with planning departments and other key 
responsible for municipal nance) in coordination with city local agencies
managers ofces, departments of emergency management, 
community foundations and other key local nonprot agencies49. Work with regional and state entities to address 
known gaps in local recovery resources.  
47. Develop strategies for economic recovery as part 
of ongoing economic development efforts. Regional agencies, such as the Association of  Governments 
(ABAG), should work with local governments and state agencies, 
If San Francisco had known prior to the 1989 Loma Prieta such as the California Earthquake Authority (CEA), to promote 
Earthquake that the Embarcadero Freeway might be damaged catastrophe insurance or other nancial resources to key groups to 
and there could be an opportunity for major redevelopment along help ll known resource gaps (e.g., renters earthquake insurance 
the waterfront, would it have been possible to plan ahead to fund and funds for land remediation). In particular, local governments 
that project? Communities should make advance plans to nance need to work to ensure that adequate funds will be available for 
potential land use changes that may result from a disaster. In many all community residents and businesses to help them with their 
cases, such land use changes (e.g., removing elevated freeways or immediate post-disaster needs.  
redeveloping shuttered industrial sites or closed military installations) 
can help stimulate economic development after a disaster.Responsible Parties: ABAG in collaboration with the regions local 
governments and with relevant state agencies, including the 
Economic development planners should understand which California Emergency Management Agency and the CEA
government assistance programs are available and how they might 
                                          Report / January 201353
On  
50. Conduct a state-level assessment of the Regional agencies can provide guidance for undertaking these 
scal and economic impacts of a major  assessments and plans, for integrating the information into the 
earthquake. regional picture and for communicating the regions recovery 
nancing needs. 
State authorities should assess the scal impacts of a major Bay 
Area earthquake and then make recommendations about how to Responsible Parties: Finance departments (or lead local agencies 
better prepare for and mitigate this potential statewide risk. Also, they responsible for municipal nance) in coordination with city 
should develop additional risk nancing options (e.g., insurance) and managers ofces and economic development, emergency 
make them available and accessible to the regions residents and management, building, public works and planning departments
businesses.
52. Incorporate a realistic nancing element into 
Responsible Parties: State treasurer and the California Emergency post-disaster community recovery planning processes 
Management Agency in coordination with other state and regional and local government recovery plans.  
agencies, including the CEA and ABAG, and with local governments
Communities should develop a nancing framework that 
accompanies local recovery plans and appropriately channels 
resources to support the communitys vision. Recovery plans must 
51. Conduct a comprehensive post-disaster include realistic options for obtaining the resources necessary to 
economic loss assessment, and update or develop a achieve their objectives. In particular, plans should recognize the 
comprehensive disaster recovery nancing plan. limits of federal and state assistance programs and identify other 
sources of funding and investment. (For example, the FEMA Public 
Assistance Program may provide funding to restore damaged public 
Once disaster strikes, in addition to assessing building and 
buildings to pre-disaster condition but may not provide funding for 
infrastructure damage, local governments need to consider social and 
signicant changes.) 
economic impacts, including ripple effects such as lost wages and 
decreases in tax revenue. The information should be integrated into 
Responsible Parties: Finance departments (or lead local agencies 
a disaster recovery nancing plan that identies the known available 
responsible for municipal nance) in coordination with city 
resources (both public and private) for recovery, the gaps and funding 
managers ofces and emergency management and planning 
shortfalls and strategies for addressing those gaps.
departments
Local stafng plans need to recognize that managing the recovery 
process will require additional resources. Stafng for specialized post-53. Develop and maintain proactive communications 
disaster procedures, such as expedited plan reviews and approval with capital markets and credit agencies.
processes, sometimes does not qualify for FEMA Public Assistance 
Program funding. Efforts to build local reserves and strong credit ratings can be 
erased in an instant when a major disaster strikes. After a disaster, 
If local governments have developed a pre-disaster recovery nancing communities often face dramatic declines in tax revenues and 
plan, they should reassess it and amend it as necessary once reductions in their credit ratings, impeding their ability to issue 
the disaster landscape is revealed. Also, local governments need bonds  all at a time when additional staff and funds are needed to 
procedures to identify and address the additional recovery needs continue normal public services and nance recovery-related work. In 
that unfold over time, such as business closings and consequent the initial months and years following a major disaster, communities 
unemployment. These consequences can dramatically complicate should proactively initiate and maintain good communication with 
and even undermine recovery plans and initial investments. credit agencies and major banks about local recovery plans, nances 
and budgets. For example, in New Orleans, after both the City 
A solid, defensible set of data is essential to making a case for Council and state recovery authority approved the citys post-Katrina 
post-disaster funding and resource needs. Without a thorough recovery plan, elected ofcials and key city staff went on a post-
understanding of what will be needed, it will be time-consuming and disaster road show to New York and Washington, D.C., to share the 
difcult to develop ad hoc programs and implement new and creative recovery vision and help raise much-needed capital to nance the 
nancing schemes. Comprehensive and transparent post-disaster loss citys needs. 
estimates can also ensure a fair distribution of resources unaffected  
by politics.Responsible Parties: Finance departments (or lead local agencies 
responsible for municipal nance) in coordination with city 
managers ofces and economic development, emergency  
 
54   Report / January 2013
Section 4: Financing
management, building inspection, public works and planning 
departmentsGeological Hazard Abatement Districts (GHADs)
54. Seek innovative ways to nance recovery A GHAD is a local assessment district formed to prevent, mitigate, 
projects.  abate or control geologic hazards such as landslides, land 
subsidence or soil erosion. GHADs are governed by an elected 
A variety of mechanisms can nance recovery projects. These include board and offer a variety of nancing tools, including landowner 
public private partnerships (often called P3s; see page 53) and assessments collected through a property tax subject to approval 
special districts established for specic development activities, such by property owners within the district. GHADs allow communities 
as infrastructure nancing districts and community-based economic to focus on mitigation and damage prevention and to react to 
development districts. Geologic hazard abatement districts (GHADs) unexpected events quickly. They also allow for an efcient way of 
can also allow communities to reduce hazard-related vulnerabilities. collecting funds. Improvements undertaken by GHADs are exempt 
(For more on GHADs, see sidebar at right).from CEQA review and provide a degree of immunity from liability 
for actions taken to reduce geologic risks.  
Local government staffs need to know about innovative nancing 
mechanisms, grant writing and fund raising in order to sustain 
recovery. They should also understand how to tap into other funding 56. Create a community recovery nance hub. 
resources such as social-network donors, community banks, angel Local governments may need to assist residents, small businesses 
donors and socially conscious venture capital or investment funds. and local organizations in obtaining nancial resources for recovery, 
particularly for post-disaster retrots and land use mitigation efforts. 
Responsible Parties: Finance departments (or lead local agencies We encourage local governments to create a recovery nancing 
responsible for municipal nance) in coordination with city clearing house for the entire community  possibly with physical 
managers ofces and emergency management and planning ofces as well as a web presence  to centralize information on 
departmentsdisaster assistance programs that might be available from federal, 
state and private sources. This clearing house should ensure that 
55. Engage the private sector in planning for every person and organization in the community understands what 
investment in recovery.  programs exist, as well as their eligibility requirements, their basic 
rules and regulations, and how to maximize success in applying for 
As described above, public funding will provide only part of the funds. Local governments could partner with nancial institutions to 
necessary recovery resources. But private entities may be reluctant facilitate this process. Hub ofces could be co-located with federal 
to risk their resources if they are not condent that the recovery will and state disaster assistance centers, or they could be located within 
be sustained. Local governments should engage nancial institutions community facilities such as libraries, neighborhood community 
in recovery planning processes  in particular, those institutions centers and schools.
that are based in the community or that have signicant investments 
in the community. Local governments should work with investors Responsible Parties: Finance departments (or lead local 
to determine conditions that would encourage private investment, agencies responsible for municipal nance) in coordination with 
identify nancial instruments that could be used to support recovery city managers ofces, emergency management and planning 
and develop ways to combine public funding and assistance departments, local nancial institutions and federal and state 
programs with private investment to  development.  disaster assistance partners
Responsible Parties: Finance departments (or lead local agencies 57. Secure resources for land use relocations and 
responsible for municipal nance) in coordination with city buyouts.  
managers ofces and economic development, emergency 
management and planning departmentsCommunities have often funded either the relocation or the purchase 
and demolition of structures located in hazardous areas, in order to 
convert the property to open space or some other use that would 
reduce future vulnerability. In the United States, relocations and 
buyouts are frequently used to remove structures from areas that 
are ood-prone, often nanced by FEMA Hazard Mitigation Grant 
Program funds.  Similarly, FEMA Public Assistance Program funding 
can be used to relocate public facilities from hazardous areas, or to 
fund a share of an alternate project in lieu of restoring a facility in 
                                          Report / January 201355
On  
a hazardous area. Such mechanisms could help remove structures 
from areas that are prone to liquefaction or earthquake-generated 
landslides. FEMA grants for relocations and buyouts may be limited 
because the activities dont meet program eligibility requirements 
or because theyre not cost-effective. But in areas that are prone to 
multiple hazards, such as liquefaction zones that are also subject to 
ooding, the combined risk to structures may increase the cost-
effectiveness of removing them. In the post-disaster environment, 
local governments should pursue opportunities to use grant funds 
for these purposes, work with state grant managers to t relocation 
and buyout projects into recovery and mitigation programs and lobby 
to use disaster-specic funding programs to remove structures from 
hazardous areas. 
Responsible Parties: Finance departments (or lead local agencies 
responsible for municipal nance) in coordination with city managers 
ofces, emergency management and planning departments, and 
federal and state disaster assistance partners
91  EERI (Earthquake Engineering Research Institute). 1995. Northridge 
Earthquake Reconnaissance Report, Earthquake Spectra, vol. 11. 
92  Petak, William J., and Shirin Elahi. 2001. The Northridge Earthquake, USA 
and Its Economic and Social Impacts. Laxenburg, Austria: International Institute 
for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA).
93  City of Los Angeles. 1995. In the Wake of the Quake, A Prepared City 
Responds: A Report to the Los Angeles City Council.
94  Spangle Associates. 1997. Evaluation of Use of the Los Angeles Recovery 
and Reconstruction Plan After the Northridge Earthquake. Portola Valley, CA: 
Spangle Associates.
95  City of Los Angeles. 1995. In the Wake of the Quake, A Prepared City 
Responds: A Report to the Los Angeles City Council.
96  Spangle Associates. 1997. Evaluation of Use of the Los Angeles Recovery 
and Reconstruction Plan After the Northridge Earthquake. Portola Valley, CA: 
Spangle Associates.
97  Ibid
98  Olshansky, Robert B., Laurie A. Johnson, and Kenneth C. Topping. 2005. 
Opportunity in Chaos: Rebuilding After the 1994 Northridge and 1995 Kobe 
Earthquakes, www.urban.illinois.edu/faculty/olshansky/chaos/Opportunity-in-
Chaos-March2011.pdf
99  Inam, Aseem. 2005. Planning for the Unplanned: Recovering from Crises in 
Megacities. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
100  Spangle Associates. 1997. Evaluation of Use of the Los Angeles Recovery 
and Reconstruction Plan After the Northridge Earthquake. Portola Valley, CA: 
Spangle Associates.
101  Ibid
102  Ibid
103  Ibid
104  Ibid
105  Olshansky, Robert B., Laurie A. Johnson, and Kenneth C. Topping. 2005. 
Opportunity in Chaos: Rebuilding After the 1994 Northridge and 1995 Kobe 
Earthquakes, www.urban.illinois.edu/faculty/olshansky/chaos/Opportunity-in-
Chaos-March2011.pdf
56   Report / January 2013
Case Study: Los Angeles, CA
Redevelopment for Recovery After the Northridge Earthquake 
The magnitude 6.7 decisions on land use, building heights, oor area ratios, setbacks, 
Northridge Earthquake parking and sign control.98 For four years, the city planning 
struck Southern California department grandfathered pre-existing zoning or nonconforming 
on the morning of January circumstances. Additionally, the planning department prepared, and 
17, 1994, causing 57 the city council adopted, a new safety element on the basis of hazard 
deaths, disrupting many and risk information derived from the earthquake. A reconstruction 
of the regions freeways effort known as Rebuild L.A. had been launched following the 1992 
map 2013 Googleand infrastructure systems, South Central Los Angeles riots; it was actively underway at the time 
damaging more than 25,000 of the Northridge Earthquake and also provided a model for many 
businesses and 100,000 housing units and leaving 22,000 people initiatives the city took after the earthquake.99
homeless.91 At the time, the Northridge Earthquake was the costliest 
disaster in U.S. history, with total direct economic losses exceeding After the Northridge Earthquake, the Los Angeles City Council 
$40 billion (1995 dollars), with $25 billion in property damage. directed the community redevelopment agency (CRA) to survey 
Insured losses amounted to $14 billion.92damage and conduct community meetings to explore creating 
emergency redevelopment districts as a tool for economic 
With a population of more than 3.5 million at the time, the City of recovery.100 The state Community Redevelopment Disaster Project 
Los Angeles sustained the majority of the regions damage, which Law, then in place, allowed cities to streamline the process of 
was concentrated within the relatively suburban areas of the San establishing redevelopment project areas to repair damage following a 
Fernando Valley north of downtown. The city estimated its total losses federally declared disaster.
at $790 million in damage to public facilities and infrastructure, 
as well as related emergency response costs, and $66 million in To determine whether redevelopment was a viable approach, the CRA 
revenue losses.93monitored damage information and used measurable criteria, such as 
percent of damage, job loss and housing loss within a census tract; 
Prior to the 1994 earthquake, L.A. city staff had completed a draft the process took a few months and much political discussion.101 
of the rst known example of a pre-disaster recovery plan. The nal The CRA identied six study areas for recovery-related redevelopment 
draft of L.A.s recovery and reconstruction plan was awaiting City projects and conducted a fast-tracked process of property surveys, 
Council approval at the time of the Northridge Earthquake.94 The environmental assessments, citizen committee meetings and a 
draft plan established decision-making and administrative procedures nancial feasibility study.102 In November and December 1994, the 
for various city departments in the recovery period after a disaster.95 L.A. City Council and CRA jointly adopted ve earthquake disaster 
A post-event analysis indicated that the recovery planning process assistance projects (EDAPs). They were initially approved for ve 
gave department heads an opportunity to work through roles and to 10 years, but these time frames could be extended in ve-year 
responsibilities and to specify actions and programs that they increments.103 One of the original six study areas, in central Los 
then applied in the aftermath of the earthquake.96 However, the Angeles, was dropped when both studies and council district leaders 
organizational structure recommended by the plan was never applied. determined that a more targeted revitalization effort  which 
City leaders argued that the damage wasnt extensive enough and combined community-based, technical assistance with individual 
could be handled by existing agencies and departmental teams.97economic and housing project funding  would be effective.104
Existing community plans, specic plans and zoning  which were One study area, in Sherman Oaks, met with local opposition, and in 
up-to-date and described the status quo before the earthquake February 1996 the City Council voted to abolish the project.105  
 were the primary guides for most of the citys post-earthquake The city ultimately adopted four EDAPs, with an estimated tax 
                                          Report / January 201357
increment revenue of $33 million: three in the San Fernando Valley 
 Reseda/Canoga Park, Laurel Canyon and Pacoima/Panorama  
City  and a fourth in East Hollywood/Beverly Normandie.106
The CRA prepared a redevelopment plan for each area, most of 
which had similar goals: to aid in the repair, restoration and/
or demolition of earthquake-damaged residential and commercial 
buildings, support the reconstruction and reoccupancy of the 
damaged commercial centers and encourage the return of consumer 
and resident condence within these areas.107 All of the projects 
gave the CRA the power of eminent domain to acquire abandoned 
property, but it was only used 
City staffers in Hollywood, a few times.108 Hindered by 
where a substantial number post-earthquake declines in 
of buildings were damaged, property values, tax increment 
nancing returns were 
saw the earthquake as an negligible in the rst ve years. 
opportunity to advance Under state redevelopment 
critical projects that lacked law at the time, the city was 
funding. They targeted also required to set aside 20 
percent of tax increment funds 
historic structures and for housing projects, but this 
other key buildings for also was negligible in the rst 
rehabilitation and linked ve years.109
building owners with 
post-disaster funding The CRA elected not to 
issue any bonds for the Laurie Johnson
opportunities. In the decade four EDAPs because it had 
that followed, Hollywood sufcient reserve funds to 
underwent a phenomenal initiate projects.110 Instead, 
transformation.the agency pieced together 
an array of funding sources 
 including post-disaster 
federal Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds, funds 
from other redevelopment projects and bank lines of credit  to 
nance the projects.111 In each area, the CRA undertook a major 
economic revitalization effort, and nancing improved as real estate 
prices increased after 1999. All four of the EDAP areas experienced 
substantial growth and revitalization as the Southern California 
economy and real estate market soared in the 2000s. 
The CRA also invested post-Northridge funding resources, particularly 
federal CDBG and Economic Development Administration funds, 
in pre-existing redevelopment areas, particularly the Hollywood 
redevelopment project.112 The Northridge Earthquake signicantly Flickr user jpellgen (CC BY-NC-ND 2.0)
damaged a substantial number of unreinforced masonry and The Hollywood Community Redevelopment Agency used recovery 
reinforced concrete buildings in Hollywood, including several assistance after the 1994 Northridge Earthquake as an opportunity 
key historic commercial structures, and residential buildings in to fund redevelopment projects that had previously stalled. Opened in 
surrounding neighborhoods.114 The staffs of the Hollywood CRA 2001, the Hollywood and Highland Center (shown under construction, 
ofce and City Council District 13, in particular, saw the earthquake top, and after completion, bottom) has since become a hub of the 
as an opportunity to advance several critical projects that had newly revitalized neighborhood.
58   Report / January 2013
been planned for many years but lacked funding.114 They targeted subject to approval by the mayor and City Council.118 By January 
historically signicant and key commercial and residential buildings 1998, 98 percent of the damaged units in 17 city neighborhoods 
for rehabilitation and tried to link building owners with post-disaster that had seen a lot of damage to multifamily housing  termed 
funding opportunities.115 The CRA had insured all of its agency-ghost towns after the earthquake  were either under construction 
owned properties citywide and elected to use most of its $3 million or repaired and reoccupied; loan repayments were also beginning.119 
earthquake-related settlement to fund repairs and other recovery 
programs in Hollywood. As one ofcial stated, Hollywood was the In the months following the earthquake, the planning department 
most organized, so they got the lions share of the money. They led a plan revision process aimed at incorporating lessons learned 
also had other funding sources that they could mix and match.116 from the event.120 On the rst anniversary of the earthquake, L.A.s 
Hollywood underwent a phenomenal transformation in the decade City Council adopted the updated recovery and reconstruction plan to 
after the Northridge Earthquake.prepare the city for future events.121
The Los Angeles Housing Department managed more than $300 
million in federal funds earmarked for housing recovery.117 The 
department developed and administered several multifamily rental 
housing repair programs and provided loans of up to $35,000 per 
unit, with various low (or no) interest rates and payment-deferral 
terms, to repair damage; the repairs had to meet the latest building 
code standards, and loans of more than $525,000 per building were 
106  Topping, Kenneth C., and Paul J. Flores. 1997. Financing Mitigation 
and Recovery: A Status Report from Recent U.S. Earthquake, 97-A:6172. 
Pasadena, CA: Earthquake Engineering Research Institute.
107  CRA (Los Angeles Community Redevelopment Agency). 1998. Five-Year 
Implementation Plan, Progress Report, East Hollywood/Beverly-Normandie 
Earthquake Disaster Assistance Project.
108  Spangle Associates. 2002. Redevelopment After Earthquakes. Portola 
Valley, CA: Spangle Associates. 
109  Ibid
110  Ibid
111  Ibid
112  Olshansky, Robert B., Laurie A. Johnson, and Kenneth C. Topping. 2005. 
Opportunity in Chaos: Rebuilding After the 1994 Northridge and 1995 Kobe 
Earthquakes, www.urban.illinois.edu/faculty/olshansky/chaos/Opportunity-in-
Chaos-March2011.pdf
113  CRA. 1995. Hollywood Five-Year Implementation Plan, 1995 to 1999, 
Hollywood Redevelopment Project, amended May 4, 1995.
114  See note 112 above.
115  See note 112 above.
116  See note 112 above.
117  City of Los Angeles. 1995. In the Wake of the Quake, A Prepared City 
Responds: A Report to the Los Angeles City Council.
118  Olshansky, Robert B., Laurie A. Johnson, and Kenneth C. Topping. 2005. 
Opportunity in Chaos: Rebuilding After the 1994 Northridge and 1995 Kobe 
Earthquakes, www.urban.illinois.edu/faculty/olshansky/chaos/Opportunity-in-
Chaos-March2011.pdf
119  City of Los Angeles. 2002. Housing Element, City of Los Angeles General 
Plan, As Adopted by City Council on December 18, 2001 Under Council File No. 
00-0257.
120  Spangle Associates. 2002. Redevelopment After Earthquakes. Portola 
Valley, CA: Spangle Associates.
121  City of Los Angeles. 1995. In the Wake of the Quake, A Prepared City 
Responds: A Report to the Los Angeles City Council.
                                          Report / January 201359
On  
Section 5 
Information:  
The Data Needed to Inform  
Decision-Making 
60   Report / January 2013
Following a disaster, communities will need mitigation policies. For example, San Francisco and Berkeley have 
meaningful, up-to-date information to complete compiled GIS information identifying the characteristics and locations 
comprehensive damage and loss assessments for of their most vulnerable buildings, such as unreinforced masonry 
buildings, soft-story buildings, tilt-up concrete structures and weak 
public facilities and infrastructure, private housing and concrete structures. Such data can empower planners to develop 
commercial buildings. targeted programs to strengthen buildings prior to a disaster. 
Information about occupancy, business continuity, employment After a disaster, collecting data quickly and accurately is vital to the 
and the availability of utilities and transportation will help inform recovery planning process. Planners and decision-makers need to 
both short-term and long-term recovery policies. Yet in the post-know what level of damage has been sustained by infrastructure 
disaster period, good data may not be readily available. Without and public and private buildings in order to predict the social and 
this data, communities will plan to rebuild based on intuition and economic consequences. Post-disaster data informs the recovery 
improvisation, potentially making decisions that will not allow for a planning process in several ways:
speedy and effective recovery.
Understanding the level of damage to residences and privately 
Why Land Use Data Is owned buildings
t"SFBTPGFYUFOTJWFIPVTJOHMPTTUIBUNBZSFRVJSFEFNPMJUJPO

Critical for Disaster Recovery rebuilding and reimagining
t1FSDFOUBHFPGIPVTJOHVOJUTUIBUBSFVOTVJUBCMFGPSPDDVQBODZ

Planning which can be used to quantify temporary and new housing needs
t'BDJMJUJFTWJUBMUPSFDPWFSZUIBUNBZIBWFTVGGFSFEFYUFOTJWFEBNBHF
and are not operational
Many local jurisdictions may not have good planning and land use t/VNCFSPGCVTJOFTTFTUIBUDBOOPUPDDVQZUIFJSCVJMEJOHTBOENBZ
data (such as zoning, property titles, location of utilities and building leave the region
types) available to the public in a readily usable format. Important t/VNCFSPGSFTJEFOUTCPUISFOUFSTBOEPXOFSTXIPIBWFCFFO
data is collected and controlled by hundreds of public-sector agencies impacted and have different recovery needs
and departments. Some data may be digital, and some may exist t&TUJNBUFEDPTUTPGSFCVJMEJOHCZUIFQSJWBUFTFDUPS
only on paper. Geographic information systems (GIS) data can assist 
in analyzing patterns affecting land use issues. The majority of Identifying failed infrastructure and its consequences
counties and municipalities share some of their GIS data, typically t3PBETPSCSJEHFTUIBUIBWFGBJMFEBOEXJMMQSFWFOUQFPQMFBOEHPPET
street names and locations, layouts of property parcels, and locations from moving around the jurisdiction or the region, disrupting spatial 
of public facilities such as parks, schools and libraries. But access to patterns and travel times
related information, such as county assessor parcel data (e.g., names t1PXFSPVUBHFTPSMBDLPGXBUFSPSXBTUFXBUFSTFSWJDFT
XIJDIXJMM
of owners, site addresses and dates of construction), is often guarded prevent people from full occupancy of their homes even if homes 
due to privacy or other proprietary concerns. In addition, some are minimally damaged
information, such as data on soil conditions and planned public and 
private investments, may not be readily available in GIS formats.Considering future land use
t0QQPSUVOJUJFTUPSFCVJMEJOGSBTUSVDUVSFJOBNPSFTVJUBCMFMPDBUJPO

The lack of easily sharable and usable data is problematic for two in a way that better supports residents or is more sustainable or 
reasons. First, such data is going to be critical in the post-disaster seismically safe
period in order to conduct even rudimentary planning efforts. Some t-BOEEBNBHFEBUB
JODMVEJOHMJRVFGBDUJPO
MBOETMJEFTPSBSFBTPG
areas are likely to be so damaged that existing markers such as street intense ground shaking, that can inform how and what to rebuild
signs, property line markers and even buildings themselves will no t1PUFOUJBMGPSSFTJEFOUJBMCVZPVUQSPHSBNT
longer exist. Having an available bank of data will help planners 
determine what property has been lost, where streets used to be and 
who used to live where. Without such information, it will be nearly Types of Data That Inform 
impossible to begin planning for recovery. Recovery
The second problem posed by this lack of data is that decision-
makers could be using it in the pre-disaster period to craft mitigation Numerous types of mapped data help to inform recovery efforts. 
policies that would help position cities to recover more efciently after These include data about the existing built environment (such as 
a disaster. Clear information about liquefaction and landslide risks political and geographical boundaries, land use and zoning, listed 
and the seismic performance of existing building types can shape historical resources, streets and street names, railroads and public 
                                          Report / January 201361
On  
Figure 5: Cedar Rapids Post-Flood Recovery Project Database
Cedar Rapids interactive GIS database contains project timelines and up-to-date information on all the 
ood recovery and other community development projects planned following the 2008 oods. This map 
shows several kind of projects that are either planned or underway in downtown Cedar Rapids near 
the Iowa River: recovery and rebuilding projects for city facilities, residential demolitions and land use 
acquisition projects to mitigate future ood risk.
Source: City of Cedar Rapids, http://crgis.cedar-rapids.org/CR-Progress/FlexViewer/index.html
62   Report / January 2013
Section 5: Information
transit), data identifying areas of vulnerability (such as fault lines, Information will also need to roll up to the regional and national 
liquefaction zones, landslide zones, locations of soft-story and levels in order to inform the federal response and national news.    
unreinforced masonry buildings and areas occupied by low-income 
households, the elderly and other socially vulnerable groups) and Responsible Parties: For regional issues, ABAG in coordination with 
data outlining the extent of damage after a disaster, where the local governments and utility providers; for local issues, planning 
damage is located and what has been affected (such as the number departments in coordination with technology departments and other 
and locations of destroyed structures; the number and locations of departments that collect information, such as assessors ofces
red-, yellow- and green-tagged buildings; use and occupancy; the 
status of damaged historic buildings; and locations of shelters and 59. Conduct vulnerability analyses to inform 
temporary housing). Appendix 3 on page 78 provides greater detail mitigation and anticipate post-disaster damage 
on all these types of data and where they can be found. patterns.
For regional response efforts, the private sector has introduced cloud-Many  communities have begun to inventory unreinforced 
based computing tools to provide a common dataset that crosses masonry and soft-story buildings, but every jurisdiction should 
all geographical boundaries. Google and Microsoft have powerful have a comprehensive inventory of all vulnerable buildings. This 
maps that show aerial photos, topography, streets, major arterials, can help jurisdictions anticipate where the heaviest concentrations 
highways, parcels, water bodies and even building footprints. Local of damage may occur and where residents will need the greatest 
governments can learn how to use these tools and partner with amount of assistance. Anticipating damage patterns may also 
the private sector to nd ways to make them even more usable. inform pre-disaster land planning decisions, such as deciding where 
Cloud-based mapping can be a powerful way to help communities buyout programs may occur or where land use may change. A 
and residents understand the implications of damages and adapt to comprehensive vulnerability picture should include:
new changes. For example, following devastating oods in 2008, t 7VMOFSBCMFCVJMEJOHUZQFTBOEMPDBUJPOT
TVDIBTVOSFJOGPSDFE
the GIS division of the City of Cedar Rapids, Iowa, developed a masonry, soft-story conditions and buildings built before current 
web-based interactive map of the city, reporting project details on building codes, as well as the status of any seismic retrots
repairs to city facilities and on residential and other demolitions and t -PDBUJPOBOETUBUVTPGLFZQJFDFTPGJOGSBTUSVDUVSF
JODMVEJOHBHF

acquisitions.122 The map (see Figure 5) is publicly available so retrot status and any anticipated repairs or alterations
that residents, funders and other stakeholders can see the specic t 4PDJBMWVMOFSBCJMJUZJOEJDBUPST
TVDIBTJODPNFBOEFEVDBUJPOMFWFMT
projects planned and track the progress of the citys recovery.and language spoken at home; this data helps communities better 
understand which residents may be more likely to need assistance in 
s Recommendations for recovery
t (FPMPHJDBMNBQTUIBUDIBSBDUFSJ[FLOPXOHSPVOEWVMOFSBCJMJUJFT

Information particularly areas susceptible to liquefaction or landslide
Responsible Parties: Planning and building departments
58. Identify stakeholders who will need data to make 60. Understand general economic and population 
decisions, what level of detail they will need and at trends before the next disaster to help anticipate the 
what scale they will need the information.consequences afterward.
After a major earthquake, everyone in the  will be searching As mentioned in the introduction to this report, a major challenge that 
for data to inform recovery decisions. Residents will want very affects recovery is that disasters tend to exacerbate negative trends, 
ne-grained information on the status of their own home and their such as a stagnant economy or declining populations. Similarly, a 
neighbors homes to make decisions about whether to return and young, highly mobile population with few ties to the region will be 
rebuild. Business owners will want specic information on their more likely to relocate, while families with many ties who own their 
buildings, as well as larger-picture data about where their employees homes may be more likely to remain in place after a disaster.  
are and what condition their homes are in. They will also need 
to know the level of damage in the neighborhoods that serve as Responsible Parties: Planning departments and mayors ofces
their main markets and supply sources. Elected ofcials and other 
decision-makers will require much broader data highlighting major 61. Develop and sustain standardized, transferrable 
issues in order to make high-level decisions about their jurisdictions. procedures for collecting and managing data, as well 
as staff skilled in information management.
122  See http://crgis.cedar-rapids.org/CR-Progress/FlexViewer/index.html
                                          Report / January 201363
On  
Jurisdictions need to have a robust and standardized set of data that can 63. Plan for ways to make information more sharable 
provide an accurate picture of the built environment and land use prior and open to the public in the post-disaster period. 
to the disaster and can be readily accessed after a disaster. To achieve 
this, jurisdictions should set standards for basic data sets and formats, 
Making information more accessible after an earthquake requires a prior 
ensure that data sets are gathered and organized in a central database 
commitment to releasing information without extensive quality control 
and protect data from earthquake damage by designating several backup 
over the data. In order to share data quickly, agencies and departments 
storage locations, such as an off-site location in a building that has 
must know how to work with data from a wide variety of users and 
been retrotted to high seismic standards or on a cloud-based computer 
formats. Hands-on use of GIS tools will be vital to successful response, 
network. 
policy development and efcient resource allocation.
At a minimum, land use data should include up-to-date information 
A local example of a tool that collects and standardizes data and makes it 
on parcel ownership, land use and zoning, as well as any future plans 
easily accessible to the public is the San Francisco Property Information 
for growth in the form of general or comprehensive plans, area-specic 
redevelopment plans, regional plans such as priority development Map.123 Developed by the San Francisco Planning Department, this 
areas identied as a part of ABAGs Sustainable Communities Strategy, online mapping tool presents property information (such as zoning, 
local economic development plans and long-range transportation and historic preservation status and building permit status) in an easy-
infrastructure plans.to-understand format. The tool not only maps the property but also 
provides detailed online reports with data points that normally would 
Jurisdictions also need to ensure that they have adequate staff skilled in require painstaking research at the planning department to nd. 
information management and GIS mapping who can coordinate across While this tool is already available now, it has the potential to be a 
departments. Not only do these staff members need to have traditional powerful tool after a disaster as well.
mapping skills, but they should also understand how to use innovative 
forms of data and communication, such as social media. While larger Responsible Parties: Planning departments
jurisdictions like San Francisco have the means to hire devoted staff, 
many smaller jurisdictions may be able to pool their resources and 
employ a small staff or consultants that serve multiple jurisdictions.
64. Create and implement a data management 
Responsible Parties: Planning and building departmentsstrategy to compile and manage data at a regional 
62. Establish a regional working group to examine level. 
the feasibility of a centralized information The ow of data after a disaster is immense and can be overwhelming 
management system that integrates multiple data if there is not a larger plan to orchestrate the ow, craft it into useful 
sets and different types of data across multiple pieces, prioritize who needs what data when and make it accessible to 
scales. many users. This type of management needs to happen at a high level 
and should begin at data collection and compilation and end at the nal 
Transparent, transferrable data that is widely accessible throughout transmission of data to the groups that need it.
the region can assist the recovery process in many ways; however, 
feasibility issues have prevented the development of a centralized system. A large part of this management strategy will be analyzing many raw 
A working group could further research how to execute this idea, set data sets to extract usable pieces of information. Points of data that may 
boundaries about the types of data that should be part of the system and be particularly revealing include areas that experienced a high degree of 
determine what value the data would bring. The system should collect, shaking or liquefaction, which can point to larger land damage patterns, 
integrate and disseminate disaster recovery information  such as data or jurisdictions with disproportionate damage and greater scal needs. 
on the geological, structural, institutional and socioeconomic impacts As part of their analysis, communities can create maps from GIS data 
of earthquakes  and allow meaningful information to be shared more and organize data into larger databases to produce charts that indicate 
trends. These larger conclusions can begin to inform land use changes 
quickly. 
and the rebuilding process  for example, they may help ofcials decide 
Responsible Parties: ABAG to impose a temporary building moratorium in areas that have suffered 
extreme land damage. Characterizing land damage and liquefaction 
patterns can also help us prepare for future earthquakes.  
Analyzed data can then be crafted into targeted messages for multiple 
audiences. For example, policy-makers need data to make decisions 
64   Report / January 2013
Section 5: Information
about repairing infrastructure, while residents want information on 66. Create an information platform that compiles 
whether their home is safe, whether their neighbors are still around data from different sources and allows for open-
or whether recovery will be fast or prolonged. Communicating this source data collection to create more robust data 
information will involve prioritizing what data is critical to analyze 
and distribute rst, and to whom. A data management plan can also sets and open participation by all stakeholders.
address how to distribute information using existing networks and 
groups.Local jurisdictions will not be the only stakeholders compiling data: 
Everyone affected will have some knowledge about the status of 
In New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, the dozens of professionals their assets. These different data sets should be made available to 
working on the Unied New Orleans Plan all followed a data jurisdictions to create a more robust data set and help everyone 
management strategy that outlined standards for collecting and understand the nature of the damage. Assessments may come from:
managing data, provided a centralized website for data storage and t 1SJWBUFVUJMJUJFT
sharing and compiled master lists of sources for key data sets. These t 4QFDJBMEJTUSJDUT
procedures helped planners and other decision-makers access all t /FJHICPSIPPEPSDPNNVOJUZBTTPDJBUJPOT
available data easily and provided the basis for further analysis to t 3FTJEFOUT
inform planning.t #VTJOFTTFT
Responsible Parties: ABAGIn addition, much of the detailed data on damage and recovery status 
over time would be incredibly time-consuming for local governments 
65. Use smart tools to collect damage assessment to collect using existing staff. While New Orleans effectively used 
interns and college students for data collection after Hurricane 
information that can be used to make planning Katrina, during recovery the best source of the most up-to-date 
decisions. and detailed information on individual parcels is often property 
owners themselves. Providing the opportunity for property owners 
The scope of assessment after a disaster will vary according to the to contribute data on their parcels can help jurisdictions obtain large 
type of damage and its magnitude. Initially, transportation resources data sets quickly and with minimal resources. Cities could help 
and public buildings need to be evaluated for their structural integrity. develop custom applications for all smartphone types, similar to those 
These evaluations may take hours per property, depending upon their suggested in the previous recommendation but geared toward a less 
building classication: Public structures (from bridges to schools) technical audience, so that residents could post their own damage 
require a higher level of scrutiny, and such assessments may be reports on structures or infrastructure components. 
delayed until trained people and equipment are available.
Following the 2011 Christchurch Earthquake, the New Zealand 
During previous responses to  disasters, damages were Department of Building and Housing issued guidance that aimed for 
evaluated with paper maps or paper forms. Studies have shown that a more efcient approach to repair and reconstruction by allowing 
the use of tablet computers or smartphones reduces data collection all stakeholders to contribute information to help facilitate rebuilding. 
efforts by up to 75 percent and eliminates the need to transfer notes As described earlier, areas authorized for rebuilding were assigned to 
on paper to spreadsheets or databases, thereby speeding up the one of three technical categories specifying appropriate foundation 
sharing of information. When data is collected directly into a GIS designs and geotechnical investigation requirements for each 
format that codes locations by latitude and longitude, such data property. The technical category and other information specic to 
becomes highly useful for planning activities.each site is available online in a searchable database.124
Developing tools and technologies is only useful if the new New Zealands national government has also worked to establish an 
technologies keep up with rapidly changing hardware, are low-online recovery database where insurers, project management ofces, 
cost and easily accessible, and offer alternatives if they fail (e.g., building code enforcement and permitting agencies, designers and 
if smartphones and tablets cannot be charged due to power loss). builders are able to access site-specic geotechnical and foundation 
Applications and programs should be available for a wide variety of design information and contribute new data as it is collected. At 
hardware and updated regularly. This allows rst responders to use the permit application and approval stage, applicants much furnish 
their own smartphones or tablets, if they have them, or those issued information on the liquefaction and lateral spreading observed on the 
to them by their employer, minimizing the cost to jurisdictions. Any building site during the earthquakes. At later stages in the approval 
hardware or low-tech backup systems (such as paper maps and process, applicants must perform more site-specic geotechnical 
forms) must be stored off-site or in safe buildings to ensure that they 
are available and accessible after a disaster.123  See http://ec2-50-17-237-182.compute-1.amazonaws.com/
PIM//?dept=planning 
Responsible Parties: Building departments124  See http://cera.govt.nz/my-property
                                          Report / January 201365
On  
investigations and provide information on land remediation and business owners that there are sufcient employees for their 
foundation design parameters. These data points are integrated into businesses. These signals can also boost social and political support 
the recovery database and then used to generate up-to-date maps for the recovery process. 
that provide a larger picture of land characteristics in the region. 
Owners who are planning repairs and rebuilding are able to review The Greater New Orleans Data Center125 began collecting, analyzing 
updates to the maps online.and reporting key indicators on New Orleans almost a decade before 
Hurricane Katrina, but the storm refocused many of the centers 
Responsible Parties: Mayors ofces and planning and building efforts on tracking recovery progress in the metropolitan region. Since 
departments2005, the center has published six annual reports examining 20 
indicators that cover the economy, inclusion and affordability, quality 
67. Share information with the public in real time, of life and environmental sustainability. The reports have provided 
even if that information may change as more invaluable insights and will continue to do so as recovery transitions 
information becomes available. into a new normal for the City of New Orleans.
Whether residents decide to stay in the area or leave depends on Responsible Parties: ABAG, planning departments and nonprot 
information about the extent of damage and their condence in organizations
the speed and efciency of recovery. If the public suspects that 
information is being withheld, their trust in the recovery process 
and the decision-makers will wane. Residents need to believe that Conclusion
their best interests are at the forefront of the recovery process and 
that they will be able to return to functioning lives  their homes, The  is known for its exciting cities, its strong economy, 
their jobs and schools for their children  within a reasonable time its diversity and its access to unparalleled natural beauty. But it 
period, or they will seek these things elsewhere. It is vitally important is also a region at substantial risk for a major earthquake. Large 
that decision-makers and information-gatherers operate with a high portions of the population live in close proximity to the San Andreas 
level of transparency and communicate early and often with the and Hayward faults. And those faults have a 63 percent chance of 
public. Many decision-makers want to wait until information has rupturing sometime in the next 30 years.
been veried and a careful message has been crafted, but this delay 
may harm the publics trust. Sharing information that is as accurate If we do nothing to plan for our recovery, we run the risk of losing our 
as possible given the circumstances, even if it needs to be updated major businesses and our economic base. Those with the opportunity 
as more or better information is collected, can mean the difference to invest in other parts of the country or the world could choose to do 
between residents who leave, stalling the economy and recovery, and so. Residents with resources could decide to move away. At the same 
residents who stay and reinvest in the . Tagging buildings time, vulnerable populations, such as low-income households and 
as red, yellow or green based on their damage status is one tool seniors, could be permanently displaced. Simply put, the  
that provides transparency in the rebuilding process and can prove could cease to be the great region that it is today.
particularly useful to building owners if they are updated as the status 
of a building changes.Fortunately, there are steps we can take to plan for recovery. We can 
update our general plans and codes now so that we have an agreed-
Responsible Parties: Mayors ofcesupon vision of how to rebuild after the disaster. We can change our 
land use regulations to better facilitate recovery. We can consider 
68. Continue to collect, analyze and distribute geological risks when crafting future land use plans. And we can 
collect the information we will need to facilitate rebuilding. 
information on the recovery process to identify 
trends, instill condence in residents and businesses The steps we propose in this report require an investment of time, 
and maintain the recovery vision.energy and political capital. Given the nancial circumstances many 
local jurisdictions are facing, it may be difcult to devote resources 
Indicators must be tracked and analyzed to measure recovery to planning activities that will support long-term recovery. But the 
progress. To ensure that communities are meeting their recovery cost of doing nothing is enormous. If we begin planning now, we can 
goals in a timely manner, ofcials should follow recovery indicators create the work for a successful recovery.
for several years after the disaster and widely distribute these to 
all stakeholders, from decision-makers to the general public to 
the national media. Such measures can signal to residents and 
businesses that it is safe to return, can show investors that the 
economy is stable enough for new ventures and can tell large 125  See www.gnocdc.org
66   Report / January 2013
Appendices
68 Appendix 1 
  Plan of Action:  Recommendations
75 Appendix 2 
  Recovery Assessment in New Orleans 
78 Appendix 3  
  Information Layers Needed for Recovery Planning
On  
Appendix 1
Plan of Action:  Recommendations
Developing a Recovery Vision
BEFORE THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
1. Update codes and plans now to build a culture of preparedness and Planning and building departments
help facilitate post-disaster recovery.
2. Answer the question of who decides who decides in the post-Mayors, city councils and city managers in consultation with planning, 
disaster period.building and emergency management departments
3. Draft a recovery and reconstruction ordinance that can be modied Planning departments in coordination with city managers and 
and adopted in the post-disaster period.departments of emergency management
4. Develop a state-level recovery plan.California Emergency Management Agency
AFTER THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
5. Put in place a clear structure of governance to oversee recovery. Mayors, city councils and city managers in consultation with planning, 
Those in charge will be responsible for gearing up and sorting out.building and emergency management departments 
6. Determine which areas will be rebuilt according to existing plans and Recovery task force or other group overseeing recovery
codes and which will be re-planned. 
7. For areas that will be rebuilt according to existing plans and codes, Planning and building departments
take steps to create a clear and rapid process for private individuals 
to obtain the necessary permits to rebuild.
8. For areas that will be re-planned, ensure that a community planning Planning departments
process is put in place to allow for meaningful and genuine 
participation from a variety of stakeholders.
9. Plan for interim uses that help support recovery.Planning departments in coordination with the recovery task force or 
other group overseeing recovery
Earthquake Hazards in the 
BEFORE THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
10. Complete liquefaction and landslide mapping for the high-risk parts California State Legislature to fund the California Geological Survey 
of the  and ensure that necessary geological investigations and local jurisdictions to implement provisions of the Seismic Hazards 
are completed in damaged areas following the next earthquake.Mapping Act
11. Address liquefaction risks in undeveloped areas.Planning and building departments working with developers and private 
homeowners; structural engineers working with project sponsors to 
communicate benets, costs and savings
68   Report / January 2013
Appendix 1
12. Encourage private owners to purchase earthquake insurance.Building and emergency management departments working with 
realtors, insurance brokers and others to increase awareness of the 
benets of homeowner and renters insurance
13.  Assemble, review and provide critical local interpretations Professional associations of architects, engineers and planners working 
of regulations governing post-earthquake building repair and closely with local building and planning departments; interpretations 
reconstruction, including requirements in multi-hazard areas.could be developed or shared at the local, regional or state level
14. Organize and train teams of professionals to provide expert Professional associations of planners, architects, engineers and historic 
assistance to property owners and their consultants in post-preservation professionals working closely with local building and 
earthquake technical and procedural issues.planning departments; model programs for local implementation could 
be developed at the regional or state level
AFTER THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
15. Determine whether rebuilding should not be allowed in some high-Planning departments in consultation with building departments, 
risk areas.earthquake professionals and impacted communities; ultimately mayors, 
city councils or a combination of the two will make the nal call
16. Encourage and/or require buildings that are rebuilt after an Building departments in coordination with planning departments and 
earthquake to be more likely to withstand the effects of future professional associations
earthquakes.
Implementing Recovery
A. Environmental Review
BEFORE THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
17. Review execution of intergovernmental/inter-agency agreements Planning departments in consultation with the California Emergency 
such as the one between FEMA and the SHPO for issues specic Management Agency and FEMA
to the  to ensure that environmental review occurs as 
efciently as possible.
18. Amend the CEQA guidelines to clarify that the denition of Governors Ofce of Planning and Research and secretary for the 
imminent threat is the same as or similar to the denition in the California Natural Resources Agency
California Historical Building Code.
19. Amend CEQA to allow for a delayed review of plans adopted within California State Legislature in coordination with the governor
the boundary of major disaster areas under the jurisdiction of local 
reconstruction authorities.
20. Create a CEQA exemption for seismic mitigation projects for California State Legislature in coordination with the governor
buildings.
                                          Report / January 201369
Appendix 1
AFTER THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
21. Assess whether recovery actions are statutorily or categorically Planning departments in consultation with FEMA
excluded under NEPA.
22. Make use of the emergency exemptions under CEQA for covered Planning departments
projects.
23. Seek funding to rapidly complete neighborhood plan program-level Planning departments
EIRs (if such plans are developed) so that individual projects can 
work under that broader, program-level EIR (or possibly qualify for a 
community plan exemption).
B. Redevelopment
BEFORE THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
24. Amend the Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction Act to clarify the The California State Legislature in coordination with the governor
powers, including public and private nancing tools, that a recovery 
authority would have in the post-disaster period.
25. Prepare a recovery plan that includes a streamlined procedure for Planning departments
modifying general plans and zoning ordinances, as well as any 
other local authorizations needed for the activities referenced in the 
recovery plan.
AFTER THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
26. Where needed, create new reconstruction authorities and adopt Planning departments; city councils and boards of supervisors to 
disaster recovery plans to aid areas suffering from major damage.establish reconstruction authorities
25. Prepare a recovery plan that includes a streamlined procedure for Planning departments
modifying general plans and zoning ordinances, as well as any 
other local authorizations needed for the activities referenced in the 
recovery plan.
C. Non-Conforming Uses
BEFORE THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
27. Develop a policy to determine when non-conforming and non-Planning and building departments
complying uses can be rebuilt.
28. Develop local procedures to assure that the post-earthquake repair Building departments
and retrot requirements of the California Building Code are met, 
including the appropriate collection of building damage information.
70   Report / January 2013
On 
AFTER THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
29. Implement local procedures to assure that the post-earthquake Building departments
repair and retrot requirements of the California Building Code are 
met.
D. Historic Preservation
BEFORE THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
30. Complete survey work to help clarify which buildings are historic Planning departments
resources and which are not. Complete the process of designating 
individual historic resources and historic districts before a disaster 
occurs.
31. Encourage the retrot of historic structures so that they will be able Planning and building departments in coordination with historic 
to withstand an earthquake.preservation groups
32.  Work with local historic preservation groups or plan to assemble Planning and building departments in coordination with historic 
a team of historic preservation professionals to survey damaged preservation groups
buildings and provide advice to local governments and property 
owners about which buildings must preserved and which can be 
altered or demolished.
33. Compile information on nancial incentives for retrotting historic Planning departments
resources before the disaster and nancing the repair of historic 
resources after the disaster.
AFTER THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
34. Ensure that building departments coordinate with planning Building departments in coordination with planning departments
departments and historic preservation professionals when 
determining which damaged historic buildings present an imminent 
threat to public safety.
35. Work with local historic preservation groups and historic Historic preservation groups in coordination with planning and building 
preservation professionals to survey damaged historic buildings and departments
advise owners about how to shore up damaged buildings.
36. Clarify to the public that a red tag is not an order to demolish a Building departments
property.
37. Identify funds for shoring up buildings until a determination Planning departments in coordination with historic preservation groups
regarding demolition and alteration can be made.
38. Identify sources of funds and provide other incentives to help Planning departments in coordination with historic preservation groups
private owners rehabilitate their historic properties after an 
earthquake.
                                          Report / January 201371
Appendix 1
E. Affordable Housing
BEFORE THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
39. Develop programs to make seismic upgrades to dangerous building Planning and building departments
types that house low-income people so that low-income households 
can stay in their homes after an earthquake.
40. Rebuild public housing through federal programs such as Hope VI Mayors ofces of housing or community development departments in 
or local programs such as San Franciscos HOPE SF program.coordination with affordable housing developers
41. Convert private multifamily housing that houses low-income people Mayors ofces of housing or community development departments in 
to nonprot ownership through acquisition/rehabilitation strategies.coordination with affordable housing developers
42. Work with developers and managers of affordable housing nationally Local governments in coordination with developers and managers of 
to determine the viability of establishing a private insurance pool to affordable housing and California Housing Finance Agency
capitalize or purchase less expensive hazard insurance.
AFTER THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
43. Include affordable housing as part of any post-disaster damage Building, planning, nance and community development departments, 
assessment, and ensure that areas that are being re-planned after a mayors ofces of housing
disaster include affordable housing.
Financing
BEFORE THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
44. Develop a comprehensive disaster recovery nancing plan.Finance departments (or lead local agencies responsible for municipal 
nance) in coordination with city managers ofces, departments of 
emergency management, planning departments and other key local 
agencies
45. Develop and sustain procedures and staff skilled in applying for and Finance departments (or lead local agencies responsible for municipal 
receiving FEMA Public Assistance Program funds.nance) in coordination with city managers ofces, departments of 
emergency management, and other key local agencies
46. Develop and adopt mechanisms to receive monetary and material Finance departments (or lead local agencies responsible for municipal 
donations. Actively seek resources from state and federal funders, nance) in coordination with city managers ofces, departments of 
the philanthropic community and private investors.emergency management, community foundations and other key local 
nonprot agencies
47. Develop strategies for economic recovery as part of ongoing Economic development departments (or lead local agencies responsible 
economic development efforts.for economic development) in coordination with planning and public 
works departments and other key local agencies
48. Incorporate seismic hazards and upgrade needs into capital Capital planning and public works departments (or lead local agencies 
improvement plans.responsible for capital improvements planning) in coordination with 
planning departments and other key local agencies
72   Report / January 2013
On 
49. Work with regional and state entities to address known gaps in local Association of  Governments (ABAG) in collaboration with the 
recovery resources.regions local governments and with relevant state agencies, including 
the California Emergency Management Agency and the California 
Earthquake Authority (CEA)
50. Conduct a state-level assessment of the scal and economic State treasurer and the California Emergency Management Agency in 
impacts of a major  earthquake.coordination with other state and regional agencies, including the CEA 
and ABAG, and with local governments 
AFTER THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
51. Conduct a comprehensive post-disaster economic loss assessment, Finance departments (or lead local agencies responsible for municipal 
and update or develop a comprehensive disaster recovery nancing nance) in coordination with city managers ofces and economic 
plan.development, emergency management, building, public works and 
planning departments
52. Incorporate a realistic nancing element into post-disaster Finance departments (or lead local agencies responsible for municipal 
community recovery planning processes and local government nance) in coordination with city managers ofces and emergency 
recovery plans.management and planning departments
53. Develop and maintain proactive communications with capital Finance departments (or lead local agencies responsible for municipal 
markets and credit agencies.nance) in coordination with city managers ofces and economic 
development, emergency management, building inspection, public 
works and planning departments
54. Seek innovative ways to nance recovery projects.Finance departments (or lead local agencies responsible for municipal 
nance) in coordination with city managers ofces and emergency 
management and planning departments
55. Engage the private sector in planning for investment in recovery.Finance departments (or lead local agencies responsible for municipal 
nance) in coordination with city managers ofces and economic 
development, emergency management and planning departments
56. Create a community recovery renance hub.Finance departments (or lead local agencies responsible for municipal 
nance) in coordination with city managers ofces, emergency 
management and planning departments, local nancial institutions and 
federal and state disaster assistance partners
57. Secure resources for land use relocations and buyouts.Finance departments (or lead local agencies responsible for municipal 
nance) in coordination with city managers ofces, emergency 
management and planning departments, and federal and state disaster 
assistance partners
                                          Report / January 201373
Appendix 1
Information
BEFORE THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
58. Identify stakeholders who will need data to make decisions, what For regional issues, ABAG in coordination with local governments and 
level of detail they will need and at what scale they will need utility providers; for local issues, planning departments in coordination 
information.with technology departments and other departments that collect 
information, such as assessors ofces
59. Conduct vulnerability analyses to inform mitigation and anticipate Planning and building departments
post-disaster damage patterns.
60. Understand general economic and population trends before the next Planning departments and mayors ofces
disaster to help anticipate the consequences afterward.
61. Develop and sustain standardized, transferrable procedures for Planning and building departments
collecting and managing data, as well as staff skilled in information 
management.
62. Establish a regional working group to examine the feasibility of a ABAG
centralized information management system that integrates multiple 
data sets and different types of data across multiple scales.
63. Plan for ways to make information more sharable and open to the Planning departments
public in the post-disaster period.
AFTER THE DISASTER
ActionResponsible Party
64. Create and implement a data management strategy to compile and ABAG
manage data at a regional level.
65. Use smart tools to collect damage assessment information that can Building departments
be used to make planning decisions.
66. Create an information platform that compiles data from different Mayors ofces and planning and building departments
sources and allows for open-source data collection to create more 
robust data sets and open participation by all stakeholders.
67. Share information with the public in real time, even if that Mayors ofces
information may change as more information becomes available.
68. Continue to collect, analyze and distribute information on the ABAG, planning departments and nonprot organizations
recovery process to identify trends, instill condence in residents 
and businesses and maintain the recovery vision.
74   Report / January 2013
On 
Appendix 2
Recovery Assessment in New Orleans
The Unied New Orleans Plan (UNOP) process launched in August preferences and 3) construct recovery plans and a prioritized list of 
2006 took a two-tiered approach to planning. A citywide planning recovery projects. Figure 6, below, provides a list of sectors analyzed 
team had two key charges: 1) assess the more systemic, citywide on a citywide basis as part of the recovery assessment. Figure 7, on 
needs such as infrastructure recovery and 2) unify the previous and the following page, shows the neighborhood recovery assessment 
ongoing planning efforts into one comprehensive citywide strategic guidelines. The city- and district-level recovery assessments then 
recovery and rebuilding plan. Another group of planning consultants informed the next stages in recovery planning: scenario development, 
worked at the district level, constructing recovery plans for each of specic recovery projects and planning policy.
the citys 13 planning districts. Both the citywide and district teams 
followed a similar three-phase structure: 1) conduct a comprehensive 
recovery assessment, 2) develop and select recovery scenario 
Figure 6: Categories for Citywide Recovery Assessment
The team of planners who assessed systematic, citywide needs as part of the UNOP process  
used the following categories to guide their assessments.
Hurricane/Flood Risk Assessment and Management
Population
Housing
Economic Development
Public and Private Utilities: water, storm-water drainage, sewage, electricity, gas, telephone (land lines and 
   cellular), cable and Internet
Transportation: highways and bridges, city streets and bridges, public transit, ferries, airport and port 
facilities
Community Services: law enforcement and the criminal justice system, re protection, emergency medical 
   services, health care (state and local), sanitation, education (public and private), recreational facilities and 
   programs, libraries, city-owned community-serving facilities 
Environmental Issues
Historic Preservation
City Restoration Management and Funding: including status of citys Chief Administrative Ofce, City 
   Planning Commission, Department of Safety and Permits and the Ofce of Public Works
                                          Report / January 201375
On  
Figure 7: Guidance for Neighborhood-Level Assessments
The following questions guided the team of planners who conducted local district  
assessments as part of the UNOP process.
Housing Conditions
What was Katrinas impact on the housing stock?
To what extent has the population returned?
What is the level of building permit activity?
What is the observed level of renovation activity?
Are there any intent to return data from previously conducted surveys?
Prior to Katrina, was the neighborhood experiencing reinvestment activity?
Historic Preservation Issues
What is the level of demolition activity within local and/or National Register historic districts?
What were the pressures upon historic districts prior to Katrina?
What was Katrinas impact upon historic areas?
Has new or proposed development been sympathetic to the aesthetic characteristics of historic districts?
Economic Development/Business Activity
What was Katrinas impact on major employers and commercial hubs within the district?
What is the present condition of major employers in the district? Key commercial nodes?
Are commercial services (drug stores, grocery stores) readily available?
Based on outreach, has business recovered for district retailers and restaurants?
Has there been major development activity or development interest in the district?
Transportation/Transit Conditions
To what extent has transit service been restored to the district? Is it widely utilized?
What is the condition of major thoroughfares? To the extent that this information can be readily collected, what is the condition of minor arterials 
and local streets?
What is the condition of ancillary transportation infrastructure such as street signs and trafc signals?
What is the current status of the pedestrian realm?
Are alternate (i.e., non-automobile) forms of transportation readily available and accommodated?
76   Report / January 2013
Appendix 2
Infrastructure, Public Works and Debris Removal Conditions
Have all essential city services (trash pickup, water, sewer, power) been restored in the district? If not, what is the timetable for their return?
What is the quality of city services in the district, such as water pressure and frequency of brownouts?
Is there still visible debris in the district? How effective and reliable is garbage pickup?
Flood Protection
How much ooding did the district experience from Katrina? Which areas or neighborhoods were particularly hard hit?
Based on information in the Citywide Baseline Recovery Assessment, what is the status of pump facilities serving the district?
What is the condition of storm drains? Are they in need of repairs?
Based on information in the Citywide Baseline Recovery Assessment, is the district at risk for ooding due to the construction of ood gates at 
the mouths of drainage canals?
Has the area experienced subsidence through the years?
How well suited is the architectural stock to withstand ooding (e.g., slab or pier construction, height of standard building elevation)?
Did the district experience ooding prior to Katrina, such as during the May 8, 1995, ood?
Public Safety
Have key public safety facilities such as police stations and re stations been restored to the area? If not, what is the timetable for their return?
Was the district plagued by crime before Katrina? Has crime  and violent crime in particular  returned since Katrina?
Education and Health Care Facilities
Have schools and health care facilities reopened since Katrina?
Based on the Citywide Recovery Assessment, are any other educational or health facilities scheduled to be reopened in the future?
What is the present condition of these facilities? What was their condition prior to Katrina?
Are educational and health facilities conveniently located for those without access to an automobile?
Other Community Facilities
Have other community facilities such as libraries and community centers been reopened since Katrina?
What is the status of the districts green infrastructure, such as park and street tree maintenance?
Were parks and community facilities conveniently located and relatively abundant prior to Katrina? What was their pre-Katrina condition? 
Based on information in the Citywide Baseline Recovery Assessment, what is the timetable for additional community facilities to be restored?
                                          Report / January 201377
On  
Appendix 3  
Gathering the Necessary Data for Recovery Planning
The following tables represent just some of the most important data The types of data that are useful to collect include those that 
that will inform planning for a disaster and the planning process after characterize the built environment, those that reveal vulnerabilities 
a disaster. This data can be collected and coded in a way that will and those that show post-disaster damage. Two of these can 
allow it to be mapped. With geographic information systems (GIS) be collected before the disaster: Figure 8 lists data types that 
software, each data set can be expressed as a layer of information characterize the built environment; Figure 9 lists data types that 
and mapped on top of other data sets. For example, public buildings reveal vulnerability, as well as where to nd them.
(one layer) can be shown on the same map as zoning information 
(another layer).
Figure 8: Data That Characterizes the Built Environment
Data on the built environment is typically collected and consolidated at the local level and informs 
decision-makers on the current status of assets. The following GIS data layers are important for 
understanding the characteristics of the current built environment.
Political and geographical boundaries, including congressional districts, metropolitan planning areas, cities, council districts, special districts, school districts, 
   ZIP codes and census blocks
Social characteristics of census block groups, including household size, owner-renter occupancy, income, age, ethnicity and language spoken
Power plants, substations and power transmission lines 
Land use and zoning
Historical districts, landmarks and buildings
Freeways, interchanges and ramps
Street names and address ranges
Railroads, surface rail lines, stations and other public transit
Airports and ports
Building characteristics, including type of unit (multifamily, mixed-use, single-family, attached or detached, number of oors), type of structure (unreinforced 
   masonry, soft-story, etc.) and age
Existing plans for growth: general plans, specic plans and regional plans (including priority development areas)
Water and wastewater treatment plans and transmission systems
Public buildings
Police and re stations
Schools
Medical centers and hospitals
Community centers
Bridges 
78   Report / January 2013
Appendix 3
Figure 9: Data That Illustrates Physical Vulnerability
Physical vulnerability during a major earthquake can have many causes, from geological conditions to 
social factors. This table lists where to nd these key GIS data layers for disaster planning purposes.
Data LayerSourceGIS Provider
Liquefactionhttp://gmw.consrv.ca.gov/shmp/MapProcessor.California Geological Survey (CGS)
asp?Action=Quad&Location=NoCal
Note: Use Internet Explorer, not compatible with Google 
Chrome.
Faultshttp://www.quake.ca.gov/gmaps/ap/ap_maps.htmCGS
Soilshttp://www.dot.ca.gov/hq/tsip/gis/datalibrary/gisdatalibrary.CalTrans
html#soil
Soilshttp://datagateway.nrcs.usda.gov/U.S. Department of Agriculture
http://soildatamart.nrcs.usda.gov/Download.
aspx?Survey=CA689&UseState=CA
Landslide zoneshttp://gmw.consrv.ca.gov/shmp/MapProcessor.CGS
asp?Action=Quad&Location=NoCal
Note: Use Internet Explorer, not compatible with Google 
Chrome. Requires Java.
Earthquake shaking hazardshttp://gis.abag.ca.gov/gisdata.htmlAssociation of  Governments
Wellshttp://www.conservation.ca.gov/dog /maps/Pages/CGS
GISMapping2.aspx  or  ftp://ftp.consrv.ca.gov/pub/oil/GIS/
Additional geologic datahttp://www.atlas.ca.gov/download.html#casil/geodeticCal-Atlas
Tsunami zoneshttp://www.conservation.ca.gov/cgs/geologic_hazards/California Department of Conservation
Tsunami/Inundation_Maps/SanFrancisco/Pages/
SanFrancisco.aspx
In raster, not vector (GIS) format. Routes are described in 
Tsunami Response Annex by URS.
Unreinforced masonry buildingsMust be developed by jurisdictionLocal jurisdictions
Soft-story buildingsMust be developed by jurisdictionLocal jurisdictions
Social vulnerability indicators: income, factnder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtmlU.S. Census Bureau
language spoken, age and level of 
education
Existing blight or other problem propertiesMust be developed by jurisdictionLocal jurisdictions
                                          Report / January 201379
Ideas + action for a better city
The mission of  is to promote good 
planning and good government through 
research, education and advocacy. 
 is a member-supported nonprot 
organization. Join us. 
www..org

654 Mission Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
tel. 415.781.8726
info@.org
