$108m needed to restore earthquake-damaged Canterbury Provincial Chambers

Dean Kozanic The Provincial Chambers building on Durham St.

Restoration of the historic Canterbury Provincial Chambers is unlikely start for at least 10 years because the city council does not have the $108 million needed for the project.

The buildings at the corner of Armagh and Durham streets date back to the 1850s and are widely acknowledged as New Zealand's most outstanding examples of high Victorian gothic revival architecture, but they were badly damaged in the February 2011 earthquake. The stone chamber, built in 1865, immediately collapsed in the earthquake and the stone towers at both Armagh and Durham streets had to be removed because they were so badly damaged.

The council had the buildings insured for about $30m but according to the council's draft Long Term Plan, restoring and earthquake strengthening will cost $108m.

Press Archives The Canterbury Provincial Chambers as photographed in the 1920s.

Another $12.6m needs to be spent on Our City Otautahi, the former Municipal Chambers building on the corner of Oxford Tce and Worcester Blvd.

The council said it had made both the Canterbury Provincial Chambers and Our City Otautahi weathertight but full restoration of the buildings was unlikely for at least 10 years because there was no money to do the work.

Many of the 65 heritage buildings the council owns were badly damaged in the earthquakes. It has started work on fixing landmarks like Mona Vale, the Sign of the Takahe and Akaroa's Gaiety Hall and has another $7.6m earmarked in the Long Term Plan for the restoration of other heritage buildings but that is only a small fraction of the funds needed.

Dean Kozanic The quake-damaged Canterbury Provincial Chambers have been made weathertight but full restoration is at least 10 years away.

Heritage New Zealand southern general manager Rob Hall said the long timeframe for the restoration of the chambers was understandable given the financial pressures the council faced and the multiplicity of projects it had to juggle. The buildings had been made secure and were unlikely to deteriorate further.

"There's plenty of examples, particularly in Europe post World War II, where buildings were secured and repaired at a later time," Hall said.

Heritage advocate Dr Anna Crighton, who is a member of the Canterbury Provincial Chambers advisory group, said the council was taking the right approach to the restoration of the buildings.

"The way they have deconstructed the important parts and salvaged important and significant features from the damaged part of the buildings has been done to international best practice," Crighton said.

As the restoration programme progressed she assumed the council would prioritise the most important features first, much like at the Arts Centre.

Historic Places Canterbury chairman Mark Gerrard acknowledged the significant costs of restoring the Canterbury Provincial Chambers but said the investment was necessary because the buildings were the only purpose-built provincial government buildings left in New Zealand.

"They are an architectural gem and the detailing is superb. They also represent the commitment the early settlers had to this city," he said.

- The Press