$200 million donated for quake relief

More than $200 million has been donated or pledged to help the Canterbury earthquake recovery.

The money has been filtered through relief agencies, central government and local councils.

More than $110m has been spent or allocated in Canterbury, with the Red Cross alone spending $44m on hardship grants in the first few weeks after the February 22 quake.

The biggest funds have been the Red Cross appeals for the September 2010 and February 2011 quakes, which collectively raised $111m, and the Government's Christchurch Earthquake Appeal, which raised $66m, with another $30m pledged.

Through an independent commission, the Red Cross fund has paid out $54m through 75,000 grants, mostly in one-off $1000 hardship payments.

The Red Cross has set up 15 grants, which cover everything from families of quake victims to winter heating for the elderly. It has allocated $13m to a five-year recovery programme to build community disaster resilience, leaving about $44m still to be distributed.

The Government's appeal trust has allocated $66m to rebuilding projects, although most of the money has yet to be spent.

The biggest single donation has been $14m towards rebuilding the Christchurch Arts Centre.

Canterbury University vice-chancellor Rod Carr, one of the fund's trustees, said donations had dropped to a trickle and it was unlikely much more money would be forthcoming.

Millions of dollars have also been donated to the smaller Canterbury earthquake heritage building fund, the Salvation Army appeal and the mayoral earthquake relief fund.

The mayoral fund has received more than $7m and has spent $3.6m on "repairing or rebuilding damaged community buildings or structures".

So far, $40,000 has been allocated to underwrite the quake-hit Hagley Golf Club and $89,000 given to the Tramway Historical Society to build storage sheds for trams that have been unable to operate in central Christchurch.

Another $13,500 was spent by Christchurch City Council staff on Sumner's post-quake plan.

The council could not provide figures yesterday on how much donated money had been spent.

- Canterbury

Comments