2015 will be 'year of momentum' for Christchurch

John Kirk-Anderson Canterbury employers' leader Peter Townsend says the region is one-quarter of the way to recovery.

This year will be a year of momentum for Christchurch's recovery, says Canterbury's earthquake recovery leader.

Central and local government, business and media leaders painted a positive picture of Christchurch's rebuild at The Seismics and the City forum Friday.

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) acting chief executive John Ombler said it was easy to be impatient but recovery could take 10 to 20 years.

He said Canterbury was now at the "tail end of the emergency phase".

"2015 is a year that people will remember as a year of momentum," he said.

Earthquake Commission chief executive Ian Simpson said EQC was learning the lessons learned in Christchurch to become a better organisation.

The five per cent of homeowners who were still waiting to settle their claims were EQC's "absolute focus" this year.

He said the repairs left to be completed were the most complex and some might still go over cap.

He was aware that for homeowners "to be with us for four years and then go overcap is the absolutely worst outcome", one EQC tried to avoid but which was "inevitable".

Christchurch City Council finance spokesperson Raf Manji said 2015 would be a year of transition towards longer term planning.

Council and government had improved collaboration in the past months.

"There is no room for patch protection and egos," he said.

Canterbury Employers Chamber of Commerce chief executive Peter Townsend said Canterbury was 25 per cent of the way to recovery.

He said 2026 would be the end of the reconstruction phase and challenged the audience to think more strategically and view rebuild realistically.

Managing growth, skills shortages and personal stress were the main issues Christchurch business owners faced.

Press editor Joanna Norris asked the audience: "What are you doing for Christchurch?"

She said anchor projects and money would not create vibrancy.

The city's future "lies in the hands of entrepreneurs big and small", and in the community.

"This is up to us," she said.

- The Press