30,000 workers needed for Christchurch rebuild ALAN WOOD

Up to 30,000 extra workers will be needed for the $30 billion Canterbury earthquake rebuild over the next five to 10 years.

That is the view of a new board set up to represent the Canterbury rebuild, with Government agencies represented as part of team.

The Canterbury Employment & Skills Board (CESB) aims to help find workers for the rebuild and streamline the skills and numbers needed during phases of the reconstruction of the heart of the Garden City.

The need for a dedicated board was recognised by Canterbury Development Corporation workforce strategy manager Simon Worthington and others involved in its setup.

He said the board had been formed to bring together all the pieces of the labour market into a sensible vehicle for the benefit of Canterbury.

"What we're trying to do is pull all those different agencies together so that we can make some sensible, effective decisions going forward,'' Worthington said.

Board chairman Carl Davidson said the 30,000 workers needed for the rebuild would come on top of the city's normal working population.

The skills board reported to the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, led by Roger Sutton, and would be responsible for the labour market component of the economic recovery programme the authority was putting together.

"What the skills board does is recognise the magnitude of the work force and skills demand that's going to be inherent in Christchurch over the next five to 10 years,’’ Davidson said.

The board would be focused on building skills and the labour market components.

This would be done in three phases - first, what the region needed to recover from the earthquake, then what would be needed to rebuild the city and, third, making sure that the rebuilt city went on to prosper, Davidson said.

"That's the stuff about how do we go about making sure we retain highly skilled people through the rebuild and how we eventually have the right skillset in place so that after we've rebuilt the city and all the rebuilding money is forced through the economy, we make sure we’re all prospering at the end of it,'' he said.

"Something like $30b is going to flow through Christchurch and Canterbury over the next 10 years. No-one knows the exact number, but somewhere around 30,000 additional workers are going to be needed for the rebuild ... When you think about that, you suddenly start seeing the scale of the problem.’’

Those represented on the board, which was meeting every two weeks at this point, included the Ministry of Social Development, Christchurch employment representatives, lawyers Lane Neave, the Canterbury District Health Board, the Christchurch Polytechnic Institute of Technology, the Council of Trade Unions, Fletcher Building, Business New Zealand, the Department of Labour, Immigration New Zealand and Hewlett Packard.

The board had already formed an action plan that would develop into a strategic plan, including attracting and retaining the right people in the region, making sure that people from the education, unemployment and other markets transferred over into earthquake recovery employment market.

Also important was making sure that labour productivity aims were met. The board did not want to see skilled people working in non-skilled roles, or vice-versa.

"There's an awful lot of rebuild work that needs to be done, but actually a lot of the repair work isn't necessarily highly skilled,’’ Davidson said.

"For example, our house is cracked and it is going to need a lot of gib-fixing, a lot of sanding and a lot of paint work. Some of that work is going to be really high-skilled, some of it’s going to be semi-skilled, but a lot of it’s just going to be labour.

"So it doesn't make a lot of sense for us to employ well- skilled and quite expensive trades people to do jobs which can be done by people who aren't as well skilled."

- BusinessDay.co.nz