$600m for city's hospital rebuild OLIVIA CARVILLE

David Hallett REBUILD: An aerial view of Christchurch Hospital.

The $600 million redevelopment of Christchurch's earthquake-hit health sector will be the "largest and most complex building project in the history of New Zealand's public health service", the Government says.

Cabinet has signed off on the redevelopment plans and construction work is set to kick off within the next few months, Health Minister Tony Ryall said.

"The rebuild will go a long way to setting Canterbury health services back on their feet after the 2010 and 2011 earthquakes," he said.

"Christchurch will have world class facilities once the rebuild is complete."

The total cost of the project is expected to be more than $600 million, including contribution from the Canterbury District Health Board (CDHB).

The redevelopment plans will see an increase of 159 hospital beds and eight extra operating theatres in Burwood and Christchurch Hospitals.

Construction is being fast tracked at Burwood Hospital, with some site clearing due to begin mid this year, Ryall said.

Construction contracts will be let by Christmas, with completion in 2015.

The hospital will have a new facility for older people's health, including nine 24 bed wards and adult rehabilitation.

Christchurch Hospital's redevelopment includes a new expanded intensive care unit and emergency department, purpose-designed space for children, eight new operating theatres, inpatient wards and new outpatient facilities.

It is due for completion in 2018.

"This project will give a tremendous boost to doctors, nurses and other health professionals as well as the general public," he said.

The Hospital Partnership Group - made up of the CDHB, officials and others in the health sector - will continue to lead the project through the design phase.

"This will allow the DHB to focus on the delivery of services and repairing other health facilities that have been damaged by the earthquakes."

Ryall thanked the CDHB and the large number of health professionals who were involved in the project and assisted in the design.

"I have been thoroughly impressed by the work that has been done to hold Canterbury's health services together since the quakes under trying circumstances."

- The Press

Comments