Ken Powrie has no particular connection with Canterbury.

Originally from the Bay of Islands, he has no relatives in the quake-ravaged region. .

Yet when he and his wife were looking at returning to New Zealand after half a dozen years living in the UK, it was to Christchurch they headed.

"I'd been in contact with guys back here, and just saw a massive opportunity," he says.

The senior associate at architectural firm Jasmax arrived in Christchurch with his young family last year.

"There was some apprehension when we first moved down here, when we had shakes still going on.

"[But] it's gone brilliantly, better than we expected. The work has been exceptional, the chance to be part of seminal history in New Zealand."

Powrie is one of a steady trickle of experienced Kiwi architects now being drawn home as the rebuild starts to gain momentum.

There's a monumental task ahead of them. Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority chief executive Roger Sutton told a parliamentary select committee last month that the rebuild of infrastructure in central Christchurch has "turned a corner".

But the figures remain daunting. Only around 3000 of 8000 properties in the red zone that need to be cleared have been, and insurance companies are falling behind targets set for a completion of all work by December 2016.

A recent survey by infrastructure company Aecom found that 70 per cent of respondents living in Canterbury expect the rebuild to reach its peak in 2015.

The opportunity to get their hands into world-leading technology and design as the city rises again is proving a great professional lure for senior architects such as Powrie.

He is focussing mostly on commercial work, and has brought knowledge of master planning - the broader context in which a development sits - and experience of sustainable building back home with him, he says.

In London he was involved in inner city retrofit projects. Lessons learned from living and working in cities built on centuries of planning can be quickly brought to bear in Christchurch, he says.

"Christchurch has got a one-off chance to really change the way people interact with the CBD."

However convincing New Zealanders that the gains from sustainable building products and techniques will offset the cost is proving harder, Powrie concedes.

Warren and Mahoney principal Dion Young arrived back in the country in September after two years in Sweden and a decade in London.

He has returned to his homeland in part to give his children the kind of Kiwi upbringing he had. However Christchurch was also a strong drawcard.

It's a once in a lifetime chance, he says.

"The rebuilding of a new city is something you can theorise about, but it's rare in reality.

"It seemed just the right time, in terms of the interesting opportunities that are beginning to develop."

He has based himself in Auckland, but says working remotely isn't an obstacle as consultants and teams working on the projects tend to be scattered.

Young's most recent project was the Slussen master plan, where he led a design team in transforming a neglected waterfront and urban site in Stockholm into a contemporary city quarter and infrastructure hub.

Many aspects of his experience are applicable to Christchurch, he says.

"I've worked on public projects with numerous stakeholders, complexities, pressure on timeframes and budgets."

The Stockholm project was adjacent to a Medieval city, and being sensitive to and integrating history into the redevelopment will also be key in Christchurch.

"When (history) is lost due to natural disaster, how do you restore that in a modern idiom? That’s a really difficult balance to strike."

Warren and Mahoney managing director Peter Marshall says Young's experience in master planning is a particular advantage.

"The idea of New Zealanders going overseas and gaining experience and knowledge and being able to bring that back... is really important.

"It's not just bums on seats... It's being able to come in with new eyes, broader experience, fresher thinking."

One of the projects Young will be involved with is the Justice Precinct, the city's planned $300 million centralised base for Police, the Fire Service, St John, Civil Defence, Corrections and the Ministry of Justice.

Warren and Mahoney are the lead architects on the project, which will cover three quarters of a city block and serve an estimated 2000 people a day.

"It's exactly Dion's skills," Marshall says.

Statistics New Zealand figures show that architectural and engineering firms in Canterbury are some of the fastest growing businesses in the country, so it’s no surprise architect Ian Cattoen-Gilbert found a job easily when he returned from Canada two years ago.

The former Wellingtonian says he and his French wife were drawn to Christchurch because of the rebuild.

"It's certainly interesting. The New Zealand construction industry doesn’t usually progress this rapidly."

Now working for architectural practice Wilson and Hill, Cattoen-Gilbert is doing a wide variety of work from commercial to earthquake repairs and additions.

He brings solid experience in building information modelling (BIM) systems such as Revit, which the New Zealand industry as a whole hasn't got to grips with yet, he says.

"I'm finding it quite useful in commercial products to get things developed quite quickly.

"It's a lot more than software - it’s a whole process, a change in the design process. You need a lot of information early on."

His colleague Philippa Burke is a registered architect in the United States, and says after eight years working there the rebuild played a part in her decision to come home to Canterbury last year.

She is working on a range of residential and commercial projects, not necessarily earthquake-related, but is disappointed that she hasn’t been able to bring much of her overseas expertise in green building to bear in New Zealand.

"There's not really an interest in that here," she says.

"It kind of sits on the surface but it doesn’t really get people in the decisionmaking process.

"People seem threatened by change - I feel that anyway. There’s just so much going on. People who've lived through it, their lives have just changed so much. They just want their house back. It's unfortunate, but I understand."

She’s finding the differences between the American and Kiwi approaches to building interesting.

"Big is better over there. People here are a lot more conservative, they're willing to get by with less.

"You've just got to come up with creative solutions," she says.

- Unlimited