A look inside the Mona Vale Homestead

JOHN KIRK-ANDERSON The $2.8 million restoration and strengthening programme for the historic Mona Vale Homestead has been confirmed after two years of planning. Work begins in the New Year.

A $2.8 million restoration and strengthening programme for the Mona Vale Homestead has been approved by the Christchurch City Council. Abbie Napier gets an exclusive look through the damaged building before works start in the new year.

Stepping through the door at Mona Vale Homestead is like stepping back in time. If you look past the make-safe measures and steel bracing, you can visualise 12.51pm, February 22, 2011.

Piles of smashed plates have been left on the floor in the upstairs kitchen. An abandoned black apron has been flung onto the benchtop in haste and the dishwasher stands agape, half full, forgotten in panic.

John Kirk-Anderson Plates remain as they fell during the February 2011 earthquake at Mona Vale homestead.

Mona Vale is an earthquake museum. Its upended furniture and smashed glasses is a vivid reminder of how quickly people ran and how lucky they were to escape.

It is an emotional building.

Council contractor and senior project manager Richard Herdman has been instrumental in finalising the plans to piece the old lady back together. Gingerly climbing the main stairwell, he points out the perfect example of how an earthquake affects old buildings.

The ornate wooden ceilings and balustrade have survived almost entirely while the entire masonry wall has completely collapsed into the courtyard outside.

Wood has give - a lesson for the rebuild.

Herdman brings with him more than 25 years experience in heritage projects in the United Kingdom. His team has spent the last two and a half years putting together a plan to see Mona Vale stronger and safer, but preserved.

Meshing the building code with heritage has not been easy. The building has three chimneys which play an integral role in the building's construction but all three have collapsed.

On their way out they have warped some of the structural beams and torn up parts of the floors and ceilings.

Large sections of the walls have fallen in leaving lathe and plaster exposed. Radiators have been ripped off the walls by squatters and in places, the carpet has been soaked with liquor.

A heavy masonry roof is one of the most dangerous elements and will require an invisible steel diaphragm to be inserted into the roof.

Moving the sheer load of the roof from the top of the building into the foundation will be essential to making the building safe.

Herdman says a balance has been sought between the building code and the heritage status of the 1899 homestead.

"It's about how you achieve that strengthening while still paying homage to the heritage," he says. "Most of the time, meeting 100 per cent of the code is negated by how intrusive it will be to do it."

Mona Vale will be repaired to 67 per cent of the code.

Putting the sheer scale of the damage aside, it has been a long process to find a repair solution everyone is happy with. Structural engineers, heritage experts, the council consents department and the fire service all have to sign off the solution.

For every tiny variation, all parties need to be consulted all over again.

It's difficult, but necessary to ensure a $2.8 million effort is done right the first time. The council is paying the bills upfront because insurance payouts have not been resolved.

Fortunately, the building was not a total right-off. Its $3.9 million insurance package would never have covered a complete rebuild.

The 18-month repair programme will be painstaking. Even once the structural work is done, the exterior bricks will be photographed, numbered, deconstructed and then reconstructed exactly as they were.

The mouldings downstairs will be salvaged and the final finishings done inkeeping with the era of the building. Pressed copper ceilings and ornate woodwork will be restored and stone masonry blocks will be rescued, refurbished and secured back in place.

Most of the work will be unseen once the project is complete. Herdman says the credit will go to the teams who work onsite next year who will take the risks and put in the back-breaking work required.

All going according to plan, the homestead will be re-opened in June 2016.

When it comes to saving our city's heritage, good things take time.

MOA VALE HOMESTEAD

Karewa was built for accountant and company director Frederick Waymouth in 1899 and 1900. In 1905 it was sold and renamed Mona Vale.

The property is Category 1 and listed with the New Zealand Historic Places Trust. Mona Vale was almost demolished when it was sold in the 1960s.

A high-profile campaign to save it found it passed into public ownership in 1969 and saved from destruction. It is now considered a city landmark of great significance.

- The Press