A stunning post-quake rebuild

JASON DORDAY/NZ House & Garden NZ House & Garden editor, Sally Duggan, meets a couple whose amazing new Christchurch home is supremely shake-proof.

Daryl and Tara Hewitt's ultimate house is perched high on the hillside in Christchurch's seaside suburb of Redcliffs. The location, like the house, is spectacular. "They say you have to build four houses before you get it right," says Daryl, surveying House Number 4 with a satisfied gaze.

Mind you, House Number 3 was pretty amazing too. And it had the same view. But, six weeks after featuring in NZ House & Garden (January 2011), the Hewitts' ultra-modern, five-level abode on the same site was destroyed by the February 2011 earthquake, along with most of their possessions.

Tara and Daryl spent the first weeks of the aftermath living with friends in Akaroa before moving back to Redcliffs and renting while they waded through insurance issues and planned the rebuild. Luckily the Hewitts like building houses. "It's our hobby and our passion," says Daryl.

Jane Ussher BROKEN BUT NOT BEATEN: Strength and light are the essence of Daryl and Tara Hewitt’s home in Redcliffs, Christchurch – the steel and glass wall between kitchen and dining room is both structural and decorative. The couple resurrected their much-loved Italian bubble light from the ruins of their previous house and replaced the broken globes.

And their business. Daryl is director of DJ Hewitt Builders Ltd and Tara is the company's interior co-ordinator.

Like its predecessor, this house was designed by Darren O'Neil of O'Neil Architecture, with design input from Daryl and Tara. The site may be the same, but the house is different. The view may be the same, but their outlook has changed. When your house and city have been wrecked, you tend to revise your priorities. House Number 4 is very strong and it's also more of a home.

"Being a builder, I got quite paranoid," says Daryl. "I wanted a house that was really strong and earthquake-resistant." The house, which took 11,500 man-hours over 18 months to build, has TC3 commercial-standard foundations and as much steel as in four or five normal houses.

Jane Ussher TRUE AS STEEL: Tara, a keen cook, loves her high-tech kitchen. All the joinery was custom-made by Lyall Park Joinery, with steel shelving by Total Fabrication. The stunning bench is an 8m-long single piece of satin-finished stainless steel.

Stone was a feature of Number 3, inside and out. Number 4 is built of dark-stained but lightweight cedar and the only stone on the premises is a volcanic rock wall way out the back. Less obvious to the naked eye is a ground-breaking building technique whereby the house itself doesn't actually touch the ground but is suspended by systems involving steel and buffers of air and rubber. This house can safely shake. "If we have a massive earthquake ever again, there won't be anything left except our house," says Daryl.

Aside from the risk that the authorities might hear of the home's herculean strength and requisition it as Civil Defence headquarters, they have built this house for themselves. "We made it a lot more selfish," says Tara. Their business offices are no longer in the house and the living spaces are smaller. "There are lots of places to sit down and enjoy yourself."

The two-level house resembles a large U-shaped magnet stuck on the hill. "I always wanted a house with a courtyard," says Tara, so the arms of the U embrace a garden courtyard, backed by the hill. One arm contains Tara and Daryl's bedroom wing, the other the spare bedroom and state-of-the-art home theatre, with the kitchen and living areas stretching across the front. From the courtyard, you can look through the house and out to sea. Downstairs, the entrance hall is flanked by a home gym, laundry, Tara's craft room and a three-car garage.

Jane Ussher MOVIE MAGIC: In the home theatre room, which looks onto the side garden, Daryl’s photographs of Milanese facades, gilded and turned into artworks by artist friend Victoria Jones, are dramatic against the black velvet-embossed wallpaper.

Puka, pohutukawa and mass plantings of clivia give a subtropical feel to the low-maintenance garden and Daryl is proud of his immaculate lawn – a raised patch of artificial turf. "It doesn't need mowing, it's nice to lie on and it looks good all the time," he says. "It's my favourite lawn."

The indoor/outdoor flow is seamless. Glass walls slide open to let in the sea air or shut out a brisk easterly. At the tap of an iPhone, the courtyard's louvred roof opens, music plays, lights dim.

But, if the highly automated house appears to have a life of its own, its soul is Tara's doing. "Tara has a gift for interior design," says Daryl. The interior spaces are cleverly arranged to be open yet intimate; accessible yet private.

Jane Ussher HUGS AND KISSES: The entrance hall features Tara’s favourite artwork, a painting by Canadian artist Stephen Hutchings; the inverted steel V in the glass panel continues upstairs to complete an X – Tara likes Xs and Os and often uses them in her interiors: “Hugs and kisses, I suppose.”

"I believe a house should have character, even without furniture in it," says Tara.

If House Number 3 was "James Bond boards SS Enterprise", this one is "industrial meets French Country", with a dollop of Canada on the side. (Canadian-born Tara met Daryl when he was ski instructing at Banff.)

"If there's a theme, it's nature," says Tara. Trees, leaves and animals crop up repeatedly in the art and furnishings.

NZ House & Garden Daryl and Tara's home features in the April issue of NZ House & Garden, on sale now.

But the animal featuring most prominently on the furniture is a living one. Their miniature schnauzer Porscha (the spelling is similar to the car "because she is silver and German") has beds throughout the house, including a plush one beside Daryl and Tara's own. >

"She's our child," says Tara, although at the moment they are enjoying the company of their 13-year-old nephew Maguire, out from Nova Scotia to experience six months' schooling down under. A Canadian maple leaf flutters alongside a New Zealand flag by the entrance to mark his presence.

So this is it? Number 4. The forever house. Daryl glances apprehensively at his wife: "Tara thinks she's got another house in her."

"Well," says Tara, "I'd like to enjoy this one for a bit longer. But you can never say never…"

Q&A

BEST BUDGET TIP: Be honest with yourself – you will always go over budget to finish something you love.

BEST THING ABOUT THE NEW HOUSE: It is safe, warm and quiet… and we love it.

FAVOURITE POWER TOOL: Leaf blower – great for the garden, but even better when you are washing/drying the cars.

FAVOURITE NEW FIND: "Wood look" tiles – our joiner got on his hands and knees to check if it was real wood. They have the warm look of wood with the extra efficiency of in-slab heating.

FAVOURITE OUTDOOR SPOT: Front sunroom – the sliding, floor to ceiling glass door gives the room perfect indoor/outdoor flow and cuts out Christchurch's easterly winds while we enjoy the sea view.

FAVOURITE LOCAL RESTAURANT: You can always guarantee a beautiful meal and great chat with the staff at the Cornershop Bistro – it's up there with the best.

BEST PLACE FOR COFFEE: We enjoy a great morning walk on the beach in Sumner and finish the morning with a treat at our favourite coffee haunt, Dot Com cafe.

-Tara and Daryl Hewitt

This home features in the April 2015 issue of NZ House & Garden. For more like this subscribe at www.mags4gifts.co.nz

- NZ House & Garden