A super city for Canterbury? Shake-up might be in store after election JOHN MCCRONE

STACY SQUIRES/FAIRFAX NZ CHANGES: David Ayers says since the earthquakes, it has become clear how much the Canterbury story is about the relationship between Christchurch and its province. Relevant offers

Canterbury University political science lecturer Dr Bronwyn Hayward is concerned. Anyone hear the rumours that a returning National Government would create a Christchurch super-city half run by appointed commissioners, she tweets?

Yes, it sounds wild speculation, she agrees. But who knows when there is such an information vacuum around what is planned for local democracy in Canterbury post the General Election.

What designs are there on Environment Canterbury (ECan)? Since installing commissioners there in 2010 to get large-scale irrigation projects moving, their reign has already been extended to 2016. When do we get back our regional level democracy, Hayward asks?

And then what kind of shakeup might potentially be foisted on Christchurch City Council (CCC) in a National third term?

The city is still under the thumb of an all-powerful government department in the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera). The pre-quake talk was that Christchurch was next up for reorganisation after Auckland, so there is unfinished business there.

Could Christchurch get amalgamated with its surrounding districts to become a unitary authority? And could the ECan experiment be deemed such a success that the super-city council table be formed using the "district health board model" - half elected councillors, half central government appointees?

Hayward points out that local government in New Zealand has no secure constitutional basis. Central government can make up the rules pretty much as it goes along.

Thus if local democracy has been a check on certain growth ambitions - as it has been with dairying and mining, or fringe urban housing development - then a continuing crisis like the earthquake recovery might appear the perfect opportunity to hardwire Canterbury with a different set of ideological settings.

Perhaps she is being unfair, says Hayward. No secret agendas are in play. But should we have to wait until after the elections to be told what to expect?

'DIE HASN'T BEEN CAST'

This week Prime Minister John Key in fact made the unexpected announcement that a returned National government would start the process of making changes to Cera.

The department would be assimilated into the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) by next February. There would be a stock-take on which emergency powers need to remain until the original end date of April 2016.

So a transition plan to hand back responsibilities to local authorities looks to be coming along quicker than might have been thought. Something Labour and Greens had been promising Christchurch voters themselves.

The announcement has cleared the air somewhat, confirming the new city council table under Mayor Lianne Dalziel has gained the Government's confidence. No longer any threat of a sudden coup there.

And then with ECan, there is at least already a timeline for discussions on its future.

An internal review of what ought to happen at the regional level has been underway since March under Environment Minister Amy Adams. The promise has been made to release its proposals for public consultation by November, with the aim of wrapping up something more definite by Christmas.

The official line is that rather than pre-judge the ECan issue, let's get the General Election out of the way first, then whoever is running the country will have the information to fast-track the debate afterwards.

But say insiders, like "blue-green" consultant Guy Salmon of Ecologic, the strongest defence against the accusations of political agendas in Canterbury is to look at the 2012 local government legislation changes brought in when Nick Smith was minister.

Following the Auckland super-city exercise, the Government made it easier for councils to amalgamate. Once the Local Government Commission had accepted the general case, a simple ratepayers' referendum would decide the result.

Salmon says this put the choices into the hands of the local communities. The Government is not imposing some template. The current approach is merely an enabling one.

The same for Canterbury, says Salmon. "The die hasn't been cast. The whole thing's wide-open."

Local Government New Zealand (LGNZ) president and Hastings Mayor Lawrence Yule echoes this, saying the Government probably has far fewer fixed ideas than people expect. The existing legislation allows each region to knit its own solutions.

AD HOC DECISIONS

Indeed, says Yule, this has been one LGNZ's complaints - the lack of a more concerted national direction.

With the legislation's encouragement, a set of amalgamation proposals have been set in train in Hawke's Bay, Northland and Greater Wellington. And the Government has seemed too content to let the chips fall where they may.

"At the moment what I worry about is that there is a whole lot of ad hoc applications and ad hoc precedent-setting decisions being made by the Local Government Commission without any concept of what is the challenge, what are the priorities, and what are the advantages of any change to what we currently have."

However, Yule says that at one level the principles of local government organisation are simple enough. The goal is give everyone a fair voice in how things are run. And over time imbalances grow which need to be corrected.

"The big challenge for local government at the moment is the demographic changes happening with people - the drift north, the urbanisation of populations."

Yule says you can see how it plays out on the national scale, why turning Auckland into a single super-city seems such a threat to everyone else.

By its sheer size, its vast pool of voters, Auckland already dominates central government attention.

And the projections are only that the demographic imbalance will get much worse. By 2030, Auckland could harbour nearly 40 per cent of the country's population.

So a reorganised Auckland - its regional council and seven feuding local authorities mashed into one more effective voice - has to be feared.

This is why Wellington is scrambling to bigger itself through amalgamations, even though some of its four councils are resisting strongly. And why Christchurch was expected to want to do so too.

So Yule says it seems unlikely that Canterbury just wants to be handed back its old democracy, exactly the structures it had. Yet rather than being rushed into radical change immediately post- election, Canterbury's problem might be more that it is at the back of a long queue.

Yule says with the number of amalgamation and unitary authority applications now lodged with the Local Government Commission - and none of them going terribly smoothly - 2019 rather than 2016 might be the more realistic target for any serious bout of reorganisation.

REASONABLE CONSENSUS

If, for Canterbury, it is indeed up to local opinion about how the chips should eventually fall, at least there does seem a reasonable consensus. Both the earthquake experience and the apparent success of ECan's commissioners have made up a few minds.

It was not so long ago that South Canterbury was considering forming its own Aoraki break-away authority, having become so fed up with ECan's supposed anti-farming bias.

Christchurch was also manoeuvring to create a Greater Christchurch unitary authority, wanting ECan's power over public transport and environmental issues like city air quality, as well as control over the rapidly expanding satellite towns of Selwyn and Waimakariri district councils.

Waimakariri Mayor David Ayers agrees Canterbury was in danger of fragmenting, becoming divided by its growing rural-urban split.

Christchurch was being driven by its metropolitan ambitions, the rural community wanted its irrigation. So ECan, as the regional council, became the focus of these tensions.

However, Ayers says the mood is now radically different because ECan's commissioners have done such a good job in implementing a Canterbury-wide water management strategy, with 10 zone committees that give communities a stronger say in what happens to their rivers locally.

Ayers says bringing in commissioners has worked because there was an existing ECan water plan that just largely needed swift execution. The commissioners have also not over- stepped their mark. "In my observation, they have been very aware they are appointed not elected."

But that does not mean people don't want to see the quick return of a fully elected ECan, he adds quickly.

Ayers says with central government appointments, there is always the danger that in future you might get those following a clearer ministerial steer. And even the DHB "half and half" model is only acceptable because health boards are spending taxpayer rather than ratepayer money.

So the councils are waiting to see what the review led by ECan chair Dame Margaret Bazley is going to suggest. Ayers says it seems sensible to many that the Greater Christchurch area should have a single transport authority in some form.

And the zone committees have created an effective water management structure, so ECan's environmental watchdog responsibility might now fit better with a beefed-up Environmental Protection Authority (EPA).

MOOD SHIFTED

There could be some major changes suggested.

Yet most of them have been well heralded and will strike people as logical believes Ayers. And the key is that Canterbury's greatest cause of division has been defused over the past few years. Water is not the breakaway issue that it was.

Then when it comes to Christchurch's super-city ambitions, again the mood has shifted.

Even before the earthquakes, Christchurch had been collaborating successfully with Selwyn and Waimakariri on the joint Urban Development Strategy. There was an area-wide planning framework emerging without needing any mergers. And Ayers says since the earthquakes it has become clear how much the Canterbury story is about the relationship between Christchurch and its province.

Auckland's story is different. It is its own self-sustaining entity in terms of its economy and identity.

But Christchurch's wealth is tied directly to the success of the plains. The countryside pays much of the city's wages. So it is this identity as a province that seems the best political counterweight to a runaway Auckland.

Christchurch is already right-sized as an authority, argues Ayers. Unlike Auckland or Wellington, it is a single council controlling everything to its metropolitan boundaries.

"I look at Christchurch and I see an urban area which is surrounded by rural land. The only connection Waimakariri has with it is two bridges and some bus routes."

So Ayers says rather than pushing for amalgamations to give Christchurch greater punching weight, the story for Canterbury would instead seem to be to build on the political structures which will foster a province-wide collaborative spirit.

ON HIGH ALERT

Still the rumours are going to fly until Canterbury discovers what is in store.

Canterbury University's Hayward says it is not surprising people are on high alert given the province has experienced the heavy hand of government over both irrigation and the earthquake recovery. Suspicion seems perfectly reasonable.

Green Party MP Eugenie Sage, local government spokesperson and a former ECan councillor, says National also has given the clear impression that it sees local government as unfinished business to be sorted in a third term. Sage believes it has just learnt to come at it more cleverly.

Promoting amalgamations is a way to create larger authorities that will naturally take a corporate approach to their job. Simple size leads to economic imperatives starting to outweigh community ones.

"If Christchurch followed Auckland, you would get competent councils like Selwyn, Ashburton and Waimakariri being replaced by weak local boards which have no power to employ staff, no power to make by-laws, no power to hold property."

Sage says with control concentrated in a few hands, it is then a short short step to embracing business-style efficiency thinking. So if she were looking for secret agendas, it would be the expectation that amalgamations would be automatically followed by a wave of local body privatisation.

For a Government that pushed the privatisation of state assets in its second term, the billions tied up in local council infrastructure and other assets must look the next juicy target, Sage says. Just set the scene and let the actions follow.

"Councils could start contracting out on services currently provided by council staff. It'd be sold as shrinking the size of local government."

Sage says changes to the Resource Management Act - the laws councils are meant to enact rather than the councils themselves - are another effective way to wire in a chosen political direction.

If commissioners around the council table is a step too far for the public, what about the rewriting of the RMA so that boards of inquiry are now replacing the Environment Court in the handling of big decisions like dams or mining operations? "With a board of inquiry you have commissioners appointed by the minister. And if they do a good job [for the community] - like on Wellington's Basin Reserve flyover decision - will those commissioners be appointed to other transport projects? I doubt it."

No need to come at everything head on, says Sage. Which is why it is going to be the fine detail of the ECan review or the transition moves with Cera that will require careful scrutiny.

Everyone would like to know what the deal for Canterbury is right now. Local democracy seems a long time suspended. But proposals may soon come in a rush. And it is clear that the first thing a great many people will be searching for is the hint of the concealed agendas.

- The Press

Comments