A temporary long-term solution

It might take small temporary steps to get to the final answer of what to do with Christchurch's barren CBD. JOHN McCRONE reports.

Thank goodness there is a Plan B. There is another way to restart life in central Christchurch.

Looking around the central business district (CBD) at present, you have to be alarmed. More than 1400 buildings are coming down.

A cheeky signpost on the corner of Manchester and Welles streets, concreted on to a vacant site by some phantom street artist, tells what could be the story for a long time to come.

Pointing in every possible direction across the recently flattened ground, the homemade sign reads simply "parking".

Yes, there is a reason to fear. Standing on one of these shingled stretches, talking with property developer and anti- council campaigner Hugh Pavletich, he remarks that new buildings built to new codes are going to have exorbitant rents.

Pavletich reckons the number of tenants who will be able to afford to return to a rebuilt CBD might struggle even to fill a single city block, and about 20 times that area lies razed. Christchurch will be a Wilson car park you can see from space.

So the recovery is feeling increasingly fraught.

Just look at the way all the crucial decisions are being removed from public sight, being dealt with under secrecy and urgency by Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee's politiburo.

A year ago, Christchurch citizens were being invited to share an idea, to dream of a town centre filled with cycle lanes, monorails, amphitheatres, children's playgrounds and flowerbeds.

Today, the bureaucrats are hiring private consultants to dictate what goes where. Quick, hurry, give us an answer in 100 days. Tell us what commercially viable looks like so we can sell it to the CBD's property owners before all the money drains away.

Behind the closed doors, you can imagine the conversations. "Guys, we've got one shot at getting this right. The pressure is huge and there is no time to stuff around with what the public might think it wants."

As with Christ Church Cathedral and countless other decisions, an air of resignation is growing. The people of Christchurch feel disenfranchised.

If a petition signed by half of Christchurch's establishment makes no impact on the fate of the cathedral, then what hope is there for any other involvement by ordinary folk?

The thin turnout for Pavletich's recent Cantabrians Unite protest, calling for emergency local elections and a return to community politics, showed the general sense of powerlessness.

It has become a case of sitting back, switching off and learning to accept what you get. The central city is one of many things now out of the public's hands.

However, there is a different way of running the recovery as opposed to just Plan A - top-down command and control. It is called temporary. If you don't know what will work, because that is such a big question at present, then experiment.

Take all those vacant spaces, the end- to-end Wilson car parking, and allow people to have a go with temporary structures, transitional activities. Discover from the ground up how to regenerate the central city.

Temporary has already emerged as a theme for the recovery, of course. There is a paper cathedral, a pop-up container mall, a relocated central library, an events village of plastic white domes in Hagley Park and a make-do stadium in Addington for the Crusaders.

But these are interim buildings - structures marking time, filling in the five or 10 years it will take to construct or repair the real thing.

A collective of Christchurch activists - the crowd behind Gap Filler, Greening the Rubble, ArtBox and other guerrilla urban initiatives - are now talking about something far bolder.

They say make temporary part of the official blueprint for the next few years.

It might seem counter-intuitive in the haste to re-establish normality in Christchurch, but learn to appreciate the value of a "flimsy" phase of rebuilding, as one architect put it at a recent public meeting held at the Christchurch Polytechnic Institute of Technology (CPIT).

That is because by deliberately encouraging the cheap, light and impermanent, we can dare to fail. Like the weeds and scrub that pave the way for the return of a forest, life can be restarted in the CBD without needing some grand, nailed-down, plan.

It will be the kind of "temporary" that creates time for the rebuild, rather than merely marking time, as it will relieve the current pressure to get everything exactly right. An understanding of how to develop the city's empty spaces in profitable fashion can grow naturally from the bottom up, instead of having to be an answer worked out from the start.

At a seminar, Tools for the Transitional City, pulled together by Christchurch architectural historian Jessica Halliday, property developer Daniel Godden flashes up an artist's impression to show how it could look.

A collection of pre-fabricated boxes clipped together like giant Lego form a three and four-level building arranged around a central courtyard. Cafes and shops open on to the street on the ground, offices and work space above and around the back. It is all so lightweight that it barely needs foundations, just a small concrete pad under each corner.

Godden, a young British expatriate who cut his teeth on Christchurch's "funky urban" SOL Square project, says you could throw up one of these instant buildings on any of the CBD's empty sites until a property owner has proper plans to build, then cart them away to be reused. "You can break them up into their different boxed constituent parts and reassemble them elsewhere."

Godden says the idea grew out of the ArtBox project of Martin Trusttum, head of CPIT's faculty of creative arts.

Trusttum was worried by all the low- rent premises that had been wiped out by the earthquakes - the many old buildings that had been inhabited as galleries, rehearsal rooms and workshops by Christchurch's creative community.

Godden says one of the advantages that Christchurch had enjoyed over New Zealand's other big cities like Auckland and Wellington was an abundance of these kinds of spaces.

Without something similar featuring as part of the rebuild, the town's creative life was liable to evaporate.

Tapping local networks, Trusttum found Andrew Just, of Sydenham design studio F3, who came up with the basic module, a steel-framed box about the size of a container, but purpose built for a temporary structure with a wooden floor, large glass windows and cladding walls.

Godden says the plan has since snowballed from just creating small studio/gallery spaces to dreams of an entire "boxed quarter" of temporary buildings clustered around the polytech's corner of town.

From a developer's point of view, says Godden, it is clear that Christchurch's big problem is nobody really knows how to fill all the city's vacant lots.

Knocking down buildings has been almost too easy. The high level of insurance in New Zealand means that for property owners, the simple choice has been to take the quick cash exit, rather than work out a long programme of repair. However, that has now left so much of the city bare land, devoid of tenants, that there is no longer any clear idea about what might work commercially in the new Christchurch.

With everything gone, there is no logic, nothing established, to guide owners, Godden says.

Which in turn makes rebuilding decisions risky. And so property owners will hold off as long as possible, waiting to see what develops, or just invest their insurance payouts elsewhere.

But this way, they can experiment, says Godden, and get the people to come back into town first.

The ArtBox project, pencilled in for a site which was once a tavern on the corner of Madras and St Asaph streets, would create an instant mixed-use community.

As well as offering cheap studios for artists and musicians, the plan is provide office space for Chart, the Christchurch Music Industry Trust, which supports local bands.

Then, paying more commercial rents, there could be a shop for a major music retailer, some food outlets, and office space for other small businesses.

In this fashion, a natural colony would form to reoccupy an area, Godden says.

"We'd like to end up in the position where in say 10 years, we have the council or other relevant bodies knocking on the door and saying: how do we keep this development here, because it's a thriving, funky, fun place that people want to come to?"

A temporary approach is a low-cost, low-risk way to allow people to invent the activities that will fill a location, says Godden. And for most small businesses, it is going to have to be cheap and fun to get them back in. Then, as parts of the city develop a new identity, possibly quite different from what existed there before the earthquakes, it will become quite easy to move in and rebuild for the same tenants in a more permanent way.

Godden says the danger of top-down planning - starting by trying to imagine what must be the final result - is paralysis.

"We can get caught up in the business of feeling good about planning for a long time. We can spend a lot of time planning perfect outcomes, but cities are evolving beasts and we have to not be afraid to go out and make some mistakes."

It is not an either/or proposition, say those behind the push for temporary architecture, such as Halliday and University of Canterbury Theatre and Film Studies lecturer Ryan Reynolds.

"We can do both top-down and bottom- up," Halliday says.

She says the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) will obviously have to oversee the broad geographic decisions, such as what to do about the one-way traffic system, or where to slap down the lumps of civic infrastructure such as the conference centres and swimming pools.

However, the one thing Christchurch does not lack is options.

There is room for the development corporation approach, the low-fi community-led approach, and still all the car parking you could want for a good long time to come.

Reynolds says embracing temporary as a method of recovery also offers Christchurch the opportunity to make itself the world centre of an international phenomenon.

This idea about how to regenerate urban spaces has not just been plucked out of the air, he says. It is happening all around the world as a response to the increasingly regulated nature of modern cities.

Overseas, there is the guerrilla urbanism movement, where people are attempting to claim back public spaces. They will nail milk-crates to lamp-posts to create makeshift basketball courts, or paint their own cycle lanes in the street.

If the ideas work, they tend to stay, says Reynolds.

Another speaker at the Tools for the Transitional City meeting, University of Sydney urban design lecturer Lee Stickell, gave examples of still more ambitious projects, such as an open-air pool hall created under a motorway fly- over, and a market garden on a derelict site in Paris.

Stickell says by taking advantage of forgotten city spaces, these projects capture community energy and foster new local economies.

The Paris Eco-box garden, for instance, allowed people to open up craft and food businesses. It became a centre for fashion shows and public debates.

"The community could come together around the project to discover collective issues, collective purpose," Stickell says.

Eco-box grew so popular that after being moved on twice, it was granted a permanent home.

Reynolds says Christchurch could become an international showpiece for this alternative approach to city planning, attracting both tourists and the creatively minded.

"Think of the social and cultural benefits, the vibe we will create, all the great stories to be told."

Reynolds was, of course, responsible - along with University of Canterbury art gallery manager Coralie Winn, F3's Just and others - for Gap Filler, the project that filled empty spaces with various cultural and entertainment events after the earthquakes.

Gap Filler started out with impromptu bowling alleys and outdoor movie theatres, but the group has since become increasingly ambitious.

Reynolds says it is crazy what will work. There is the book fridge in Sydenham - an old fridge where you can exchange a book that "changed your life".

Reynolds says people were worried about it being left unlocked at night.

"I started getting all nervous, thinking, 'Oh no, this is a terrible idea', but in the end, it is still there and getting used incredibly."

The newest Gap Filler project is the Dance-O-Mat in St Asaph St, set up on what used to be the premises of Bargain Rental Cars - four loudspeakers and a converted washing machine into which you can plug an MP3 player. Put $2 in the slot and for half an hour you can freak out with your friends to the amusement of passing traffic.

"Who would have thought Christchurch people would ever dance in public?" says Reynolds. But this is another experiment that has just developed a life of its own.

Canterbury Ballet has held lessons there. People have turned up in superhero costumes for a party. Yet another group were doing zouk dancing, imported from the French Carribean.

Reynolds says this is when you discover how varied Christchurch actually is, and can you imagine it being planned to happen this way?

Certainly, it is the success of Gap Filler, and other community initiatives, such as Greening the Rubble, which has convinced many that Christchurch needs to take the next step and get serious about temporary architecture.

So growing out of Gap Filler, Reynolds is now proposing to form a trust, Life in Vacant Spaces, to act as a broker, a go- between, for the transitional projects of others.

Reynolds says if temporary is going to become widespread - something where many people are moved to have a go - there needs to be a central database of willing landowners and also help in dealing with the administrative issues.

"Life in Vacant Spaces would take care of all the people contacts, the insurance and other things.

"It'd be a tool kit to cover the consent laws, building regulations, health and safety. It'd have a publicity machine behind it and help with seed funding."

In short, a development agency for the alternative recovery.

Reynolds is also hoping to launch a Festival of Temporary Architecture later this year. A group of a dozen supporters met a few weekends back to firm up a plan.

"Universities around the country could get involved running their annual studio projects in Christchurch. Then instead of pulling the structures down at the end and recycling them, they could be donated and used as pop-up shops or galleries."

The event would both demonstrate what is possible and create architecture to be used.

"It would also be another way of putting Christchurch on the international map as a stricken city actually doing something rather cool.

Can the powers that be get with it? The imagination does rather run riot as to how a people's city might unfold.

A Mad Max encampment encircling the CBD, a ragtag farmers' market- oriental bazaar stretching for blocks down Manchester St and back towards CPIT, or maybe just a more rambling, home-spun version of Cashel St's Re:Start mall.

Such thoughts could be a little scary for those in charge, yet, says Reynolds, the Christchurch City Council has already proved surprisingly receptive to the idea of transitional projects.

It may have gone unremarked at the time, but in July last year, the council actually funded Reynolds and Winn to write a report on the role of temporary activities.

As a result, four pages of the council's draft CBD recovery plan were devoted to detailed Transitional City proposals.

Natty graphics spelt out the logic. The documentation called it "critical to the success of the recovery".

More importantly, there were regulation changes included in volume two of the draft masterplan to allow for the construction of temporary structures lasting longer than 30 days.

A budget of some $14 million was outlined to cover all the elements of the plan, such as greening vacant areas, supporting community groups like Gap Filler, creating temporary markets and rejigging transport connections.

Despite comments that the council could have done even more, and questions about whether its planners would in the end relax their grip on building regulations enough for real experimentation to take place, it seemed the authorities were open to a people-led approach to the city's regeneration.

The council even set aside $365,000 in this year's draft council budget to back Reynold's Life in Vacant Spaces. He will find out in a few weeks whether the money is confirmed.

But a lot of this openness reflects the mood last year, when Christchurch was still feeling all "Kumbaya and Share an Idea", says Halliday.

Now, responsibility for the CBD has disappeared inside Cera, and control of the recovery is becoming more remote from the public with each passing week.

Brownlee has created the Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) to deliver the Government's own version of what the recovery should look like. A consortium of consultants has been employed to work on the detail.

"With the council, at least you knew who to go and talk to. With Cera, you don't know who the right people are," says Halliday. So it has become impossible to tell where the Transitional City proposals now stands.

A request by The Press for an interview with the CCDU was batted away by Cera's public relations unit as premature.

However, a statement put out in the name of CCDU director Warwick Isaacs did allow: "The CCDU is working on a blueprint for the new central city and part of that work will include elements of transitional architecture.

"Exactly how that will be a part of the new central city will be outlined in the completed blueprint."

Reynolds says perhaps when Cera's plans eventually do come back out into the light, there will be an endorsement of the temporary principles - a will to harness the public energy that still exists.

But equally there is the fear that with all the attention going towards the big anchor projects, the far-off distant outcomes, the needs of corporate property owners, temporary could end up left out of the mix.

Reynolds says no doubt Gap Filler and other groups will still persevere. However, an opportunity will have been missed to bring the community back into the heart of the rebuild in an exciting way.

- The Press

Comments