Aerial views of Christchurch prove popular

Deon Swiggs/Rebuild Christchurch Deon Swiggs/Rebuild Christchurch Deon Swiggs/Rebuild Christchurch Deon Swiggs/Rebuild Christchurch Deon Swiggs/Rebuild Christchurch Deon Swiggs/Rebuild Christchurch Deon Swiggs/Rebuild Christchurch Deon Swiggs/Rebuild Christchurch Deon Swiggs/Rebuild Christchurch Deon Swiggs/Rebuild Christchurch Deon Swiggs/Rebuild Christchurch Southshore Spit Christchurch city, as seen from Sugarloaf in the Port Hills. The site of central Christchurch's proposed innovation precinct. The site of central Christchurch's proposed eastern frame. The site of Christchurch's new central city bus interchange. Cathedral Square, central Christchurch Horseshoe Lake Lyttelton Port of Christchurch Bexley and the Avon Heathcote Estuary The site of central Christchurch's new justice and emergency services precinct. New Brighton Beach 1 of 11 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

A new series of 360-degree aerial panoramas reveal how Christchurch has become a "blank canvas" following the region's earthquakes.

Rebuild Christchurch founder Deon Swiggs used a drone to capture 24 images of post-earthquake Christchurch and uploaded them online on Friday.

The images have already been viewed about 130,000 times.

Swiggs said the interactive photographs gave 360-degree views of various parts of the city to highlight the significant changes that were happening as the rebuild ramped up.

"With most buildings that were damaged now demolished, a blank canvas has emerged where the new city can take shape," he said.

Each interactive panorama showcased a different location around Christchurch, focusing on the central city, the residential red zone, Lyttelton port, and scenic areas around the city.

Rebuild Christchurch was established in September 2010 to help people engage with their city's recovery and rebuild.

Using drone technology allowed for some "innovative" ways to document the changes and provided a "new and engaging" way for people to understand what was happening, Swiggs said.

"We want people to be engaged in the changes the city is facing moving forward and these panoramas add another dimension to that experience."

Feedback on the project had been "great" so far, and he planned to update the images regularly to provide a "visual timeline" of the city's rebuild.

"A big one is people looking in their old neighbourhoods in the red zone and saying that's where my house was," Swiggs said.

To view the interactive panoramas, visit www.rebuildchristchurch.co.nz/panorama

- Stuff