Aftershock of depression, anger still felt OLIVIA CARVILLE

The resilience of Cantabrians is under threat as anger, depression, poor health, grief, financial issues, alcohol, smoking and frustrations towards the powers that be continue to plague the earthquake-hit city, new research shows.

A survey of 800 Cantabrians, led by the Mental Health Foundation and the Canterbury District Health Board (CDHB), provides a sobering snapshot of just how the population is faring in the aftermath of New Zealand's worst natural disaster.

More than 80 per cent of respondents said their lives had significantly changed since the region's earthquakes, with most saying for the worst.

Almost two-thirds were grieving for the "lost Christchurch", one in four said the poor state of their neighbourhood was getting them down, one in five were drinking more, one in 10 were smoking more and over a third were suffering health issues.

Life in the red zone was described as "unbearable" and respondents reported widespread dissatisfaction with the management of earthquake authorities - more than two thirds believed the quakes were a "convenient excuse for the Government to pursue its own agenda".

Communication from Government agencies was described as fragmented, inconsistent, contradictory, dictatorial, hypocritical and non-democratic, and more than 60 per cent of respondents said authorities had the wrong priorities, with people being "forgotten" in the recovery.

Almost two thirds of survey respondents did not believe people living outside Canterbury completely understood what the region was going through and the elderly reported the last years of their life had been "stolen" from them.

Fatigue was common among residents and many had suffered low-grade illnesses since the quakes, such as coughs, colds, asthma and heart-related problems. Some were enduring great difficulties with their wellbeing and reported increased anxiety, fear, stress, paranoia, hypervigilance and loss of hope.

On a brighter note, the research also showed "a new-found sense of hope and optimism for the future".

More than two thirds said they appreciated the small things in life and that they were coping well day-to-day.

True to the Cantabrian spirit, 84 per cent of respondents said they gave their time to help others.

The research was commissioned to inform the Allright? wellbeing campaign, a Healthy Christchurch project, and included interviews with community leaders, focus groups and a phone survey of 800 people in Christchurch and the Waimakariri and Selwyn districts.

CDHB public health specialist Dr Lucy D'Aeth said the overall results indicated emotional wellbeing across Canterbury was "not high".

"The key findings indicate that the secondary stressors of damaged homes, insurance wrangles, financial challenges and grief over the ‘lost Christchurch' are taking its toll.

"Stress and anxiety caused by dealing with authorities was "more debilitating" than the quakes, she said.

The widespread sense is that Cantabrians have experienced a "double blow" - first the deadly quakes and then the poor management of the recovery.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said the Government was well aware that life in the red zone was "unbearable", and he disputed the claims the Government was pursuing its own agenda.

"The quakes so far have cost the New Zealand taxpayer upwards of $13 billion. No government likes to be in the position where we have to run big deficits, and to suggest that is somehow part of an agenda that suits us is utterly ridiculous."

The survey results were "completely contradictory" to those of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority's (Cera) 2012 Wellbeing Survey, he said.

Disaster mental health Associate Professor Sarb Johal said international research also indicated secondary stresses, such as housing, insurance and financial issues, "can be worse than the actual event".

Johal is helping Cera interpret international post-disaster evidence, and said five years after the 1995 Japanese Kobe earthquake, an array of related mental health issues were still alive in the community, and 10 years after the disaster, housing and insurance issues were still rife.

CDHB medical officer of health Dr Alistair Humphrey said the results sent a strong message to all agencies involved in the recovery that "we need to up our game".

"It is not necessarily just agencies in Canterbury but right across the country.

"People in Wellington and the ministries need to keep coming down to remind themselves this is what we have to live with every day of our lives," he said.

A free help and support line is still available to all Cantabrians through the Canterbury Support Line, 0800 777 846.

- The Press

Comments