'Alice in Wonderland' $1.3m claim Insurer rejects 'Alice in Wonderland' claim CHARLES ANDERSON

Joseph Johnson RED-ZONED: Paul and Georgina Rout will never live in their Brooklands home.

A red-zoned couple's claim of more than $1 million on their property is a "bloated speculative figure" that has an "Alice in Wonderland quality to it", a court has heard.

Brooklands couple Paul and Georgina Rout are fighting AMI, now named Southern Earthquake Response Services, for $1.3m in compensation for a home they will never live in.

The Routs' home was severely damaged in the September 2010 earthquake and red-zoned in November 2011.

After inspections, it was agreed by AMI and the Earthquake Commission that the house should be demolished and rebuilt.

Initially, the insurer said this would cost $485,505.

The Routs sought an independent assessor's advice, which put the amount at $548,000.

After disputing the amount, their lawyer, Grant Shand, told the High Court that the Routs received a letter in February "subtly threatening" that if they did not accept this number the company might change their house to a "repair".

The insurer then came back with a "notional" repair offer of $263,000.

The Routs sold their land to the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, so would not rebuild or repair on the site. The claim would therefore be for a cash payout.

The couple decided to sue Southern Response, which was bailed out by the Government, for what they believe is the actual cost of a rebuild - $1.3m.

In his closing submissions in the eight-day trial, lawyer Craig Stevens, acting for Southern Response, said there was a lack of evidence on how the cost increased five-fold from the repair cost to the $1.3m figure.

The person who made that estimate pulled out as a witness 30 minutes before being due to appear, he said.

"It has an Alice in Wonderland quality to it."

He said the letter sent to the Routs was not threatening but merely the work of a responsible insurer "spelling out what their entitlements were and what the consequences might be".

The arguments revolved around whether the repair would put the property back to an "as new" status.

Colleague Peter Leman said Southern Response did not dispute the claim about damage to the home but argued that there was no actual "loss" of the property.

The Routs were still able live in the house in relative comfort, he said.

A repair would bring it back to a comparable state as before the quake, which was what "as new" meant according to previous judgments.

"As new" did not mean exactly as it was before, he said. It was about the "functionality" of the home.

Shand said the repair had to be done legally, physically and with no risk to the Routs.

It was not known whether this was possible because the house was built in a flood management area that required their home to be rebuilt at a level of 11.4 metres and possibly up to 11.8 metres.

The repair offer would put the house up to only 11.2 metres, Shand said.

However, Leman said this extra lift would equate to a "windfall" of several hundred thousand dollars for the Routs.

Any claim that Southern Response was responsible for damage to the land meant that it would become the effective insurer of the Christchurch City Council and all of its infrastructure.

"That cannot be what this policy is about," he said.

Shand said that because Southern Response had changed its interpretation of policy because of its reassessment of the property, those policy terms could no longer be relied on.

All Southern Response was interested in was minimising the payout it was obligated to pay, he said.

"This is a homeowner against the Government."

Shand said the "as new" clause was not about "functionality" but "actuality" - what the physical state of the house was before and after the earthquake.

It was clear that a repair, which partly involved fixing the concrete slab that had cracked with epoxy, did not put the house back to what it was when it was built in 2006.

"[The policy] speaks for itself'," he said.

Justice David Gendall has reserved his decision.

- The Press

Comments