All power to Cera as bill passes JOHN HARTEVELT

Unprecedented earthquake recovery powers have swept through Parliament with near-unanimous support.

However, there has been bitter debate during the three-day process.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee yesterday led the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Bill through its final stages.

The bill empowers the new Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) to take control of councils it believes are failing on reconstruction work.

Brownlee and Cera's chief executive can now order demolitions and the requisition of land, and get information from any source for recovery work.

"The bill provides a transition from the national state of emergency to a state of urgency, and, eventually, a full recovery for the people of Canterbury," Brownlee said.

The law will be in place for up to five years.

The Green Party and Parliament's two independent MPs voted against the bill, which was passed under urgency last night.

Green Party spokesman Kennedy Graham said the law granted a "wide range of unilateral powers" to Brownlee and Cera.

"I know what it is to work with the citizens of Christchurch who are crying out for assistance, [but] none of that justifies the extensive powers that we see in the bill today," Graham said.

A series of amendments were proposed by Graham and Labour Party MPs yesterday, but all were voted down by the Government.

However, after hastily arranged select committee hearings in Christchurch and Wellington this week, Government officials worked until 4am yesterday to choose 32 out of about 100 suggested changes.

The Government brought the suggested changes into a supplementary order paper, which was not before the House until 2.30pm.

Among the changes, the Government accepted that five days notice for a demolition order should be changed to 10 days.

The Government also accepted that clauses on compensation for people who had lost land or buildings were "not clear" and needed to be rewritten.

However, it rejected about 68 suggestions, including to prioritise the most pressing matters and for a requirement to protect privacy.

Labour earthquake recovery spokesman Clayton Cosgrove said the handling of the bill, which provided "wartime powers" to the Government, had been "botched".

He told Parliament it was "illogical and absurd" to be debating the bill without knowledge of the Government's changes. "The minister has embarked on a course akin to a parliamentary steamroller," he said.

Brownlee dismissed the criticism, saying: "The sort of jumping up and down and beating of the chest that we've seen over this is utterly ridiculous in the circumstances."

Despite its criticism, Labour voted to support the bill.

"We want the best outcome for Cantabrians and despite our grave concerns, we will continue to work with the Government to try and make this legislation work," Cosgrove said.