Almost 100 rebuild-related firms have gone bust since Feb 11 quake

An increasing number of building firms went bust last year despite the rebuild, leaving homeowners, contractors and the taxman out of pocket. BLAIR ENSOR, MICHAEL WRIGHT and CECILE MEIER report.

Nearly 100 rebuild-related companies have gone bust in Christchurch since the February 2011 earthquake, owing $35 million, an investigation has revealed.

Most of the money will never be recovered, vanishing with the firms as they succumb to bad management and the vagaries of the rebuild market.

More than half of the failures came in 2014 and liquidators and law enforcement are warning the trend could worsen as mismanagement woes continue and big ticket construction projects open new avenues for white collar crime.

THE INVESTIGATION FOUND

- Rebuild-related liquidations more than tripled between 2013 and 2014.

- The Inland Revenue Department (IRD) instigated nearly four times the liquidations in 2014 that it did for all of 2011-13.

- Subcontractors, especially painters, were heavily represented in the liquidation numbers.

- The Serious Fraud Office (SFO) has received 29 complaints about suspect dealings in the rebuild and launched six investigations.

- The Government introduced new laws this year to protect consumers including mandatory written contracts and builder requirements for residential building work costing $30,000 or more.

BROWNLEE: THIS WAS EXPECTED

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said the numbers appeared to correspond with what was expected during an economic boom like the rebuild.

"In boom times there (is) also often out of control pricing so we concentrated more on trying to make sure we had some handle on labour supply, pricing supply, building price and material supply. I think it's hard to argue that hasn't been done well.

"In a free country where people are able to start a business fairly freely, there will be failures.

"No one is happy about this but I don't know that there is a ready solution to it."

Nearly 20 liquidators spoke about their earthquake-related business. Two themes emerged. Companies went bust either because they expanded too quickly, expecting a windfall of rebuild work, or were mismanaged into the ground.

"What you're seeing is the smaller guys that were probably working for wages (before) the earthquake and decided they now have the business skills to go out there and do it themselves," liquidator Wayne Deuchrass said.

"They might be good at what they do but they're not good managers, That's what it comes down to. They fail on cashflow and they get themselves into all sorts of strife in terms of not filing PAYE returns, GST returns, getting their invoices out... You see it through their current accounts. They just use it as their own personal chequebook."

MASTER BUILDERS CONCERN

Canterbury Master Builders president Alastair Miles said the rebuild boom in Christchurch has not materialised in the form or size first envisaged.

"There's been a lot of talk about so many resources being needed and 10,000 people needing to come to Christchurch. That's never really eventuated. Different sectors are peaking and finishing earlier than others.

"The painters, they've been downsizing for some time now. As a company (Master Builders) would get five or six phone calls a week even a year ago from painters asking if we've got any work today. That's never a good sign."

IRD features heavily in the numbers. It is listed as the applicant in 35 liquidations examined.

It appears as a petitioning creditor in most other cases. A lot of troubled firms paid as many creditors as they could and left the taxman until last. IRD debts accounted for three quarters of all the money owed in Wayne Deuchrass' rebuild liquidations.

"A lot of the stuff we've done for IRD, there's not a lot of money in it," he said.

"Sometimes creditors just want to spend that extra dollar. It costs them the best part of $5000, on top of the debt they're already owed, to have a bit of a poke around."

Consequently, some smaller creditors do not bother. Especially if there is little, or no chance, of anything being recovered.

Liquidator Gordon Hansen, of Goldsmith Fox, handled the case of Genesis Builders, which collapsed in March 2014 owing $1.8m.

"There's been virtually nothing come out of it," he said.

"A lot of the relatively small (creditors), they won't bother to claim."

Some individual losses were more stark. Two of the labour supply companies among the rebuild liquidations identified had lists of creditors that were not other firms, but out-of-pocket Filipino labourers.

The four years of liquidations are characterised by the odd big collapse, owing $1m or more, and many smaller ones.

As companies went bust, those they were doing work for, often insurance companies, had to pick up the pieces on jobs left unfinished.

SOUTHERN RESPONSE WARY

Southern Response (SR) commercial manager Mark Farrow said a straightforward transition, if a build was near the start or the end, took about two weeks. If a company collapsed mid-build, it could add five to six weeks to the construction time.

"It's probably going to take us a couple of weeks to get in there, quantify the work that's been complete, where it's at, where the materials are, engage another contractor, form a contract and get them on site," Farrell said.

"In some scenarios we're going to have to interrupt the existing supply chain that has started on that build because of the contractual obligations that have been made with other volume contractors."

SR has eight volume contractors – leading the bulk of its rebuild work – and 26 repair contractors. They had dealt with about six contractor liquidations, affecting 12 to 15 builds. Most were smaller sub-contractors but one was one of the 26 repair contractors. None were a surprise.

"There's always those alarm bells," Farrell said.

"The big one for us is timeframes and quality. As soon as things start pushing out.

"As soon as you start getting quality failing ... in many cases what's happened is they've had to remove themselves from the existing supply chain they have and start bringing in guys they may not be so familiar with."

Strict financial vetting helped insurers protect themselves against such failures. SR demanded to see cashflow and balance sheet information for its major contractors.

"They were not happy," chief executive Peter Rose said.

"The idea of intruding into their financials did not appeal to them one bit and they really did kick up a fuss. After a while they concluded that we were in a partnership and they've all acceded to it. If they didn't, they weren't in the panel."

Still, healthy companies can get sick. One of Southern Responses liquidations was Williams & Co – the building company that failed in February owing unsecured creditors $2.5m.

"We have to look for lessons learnt (there)," Farrow said.

"The key learning here was things can go bad really quickly."

The figures examined account for liquidations to the end of 2014. This year is shaping as perhaps even busier.

"In my opinion there will be a higher incidence of insolvency," KPMG liquidator Andrew Hawkes said.

"As workflows decrease it becomes harder to recover on losses incurred on previous jobs or if companies are behind with their creditors."

- Additional reporting by Philip Creed.

- Stuff