Anchor project delays 'corroding confidence in the rebuild'

John Kirk-Anderson Cathedral Square from Novotel Hotel looking west over the empty Convention Centre site.

A Christchurch developer says delays on key anchor projects are "corroding confidence in the rebuild" as the Government refuses to give further details on the extended timelines.

On Friday, the Government said completion of the metro sports facility would be delayed to early 2020 and the convention centre to late 2018.

Read more: Christchurch anchor project delays cause frustration.

City Owners Rebuild Entity (Core) spokesman Ernest Duval said delays on key anchor projects were "corroding confidence in the rebuild".

Hotel developers and investors trying to plan around a promised convention centre were now "on hold and may well decide to look elsewhere", he said.

"The delays are enormously disappointing and frustrating for a number of investors."

The convention centre had an "enormous impact" on Cathedral Square, the performing arts precinct and the Avon River Precinct, all of which were already behind the rest of the city, he said.

The Government needed to provide solid reasons for the delays to reassure the business community, he said.

Labour MP Clayton Cosgrove agreed.

He was concerned the convention centre and the metro sports facility had been delayed "without explanation".

"I accept we need to get it right, but we're five years out from the initial earthquake and it has now been delayed a number of years.

"There may well be a good reason for the delays and the Government has a duty of care to explain why.

"People are not prepared to invest especially when delays are put forward without explanation."

Business required certainty and decisions needed to be made, Cosgrove said.

"If you're a business person, you say 'this is nuts, I'm going to Sydney' - this is not helping."

On Monday, Earthquake recovery minister Gerry Brownlee declined to be interviewed about the delays.

On Friday, Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) acting chief executive John Ombler said the authority was working on the convention centre design.

"It's our task to build a business case and to go back to cabinet for money and that step has not been started," he said.

"The Crown is committed to realising the intentions of the blueprint but we, like any business, have the obligation to go back to our funders and make sure that our funders are happy with our proposal and that step still has to occur with the convention centre.

"We're going to do it right, not rushed."

Ground clearance had been done on the metro sports site, which was currently used as a carpark for hospital staff.

"We expect this year to have to close the carpark off."

Cera had reached an agreement with the Christchurch City Council on the scope for the metro sports facility and had to go back to Brownlee with a business case proposal.

"There are some challenges on that site. There's a bit of a clean up still to be done," Ombler said.

He said parts of the facility could open ahead of the completion date.

On Monday, Cera did not answer requests for further explanation on the delays.

A spokesman said: "With big complex projects like these, it's normal process for options to be considered, funding discussions to be had, business cases worked up, and proposals put to Cabinet, and this all takes time."

- Stuff