Army land considered for housing MARC GREENHILL

Daniel Tobin

Marc Greenhill visits central ciity Council owned flats that stand empty as the city experiences a rental shortage

Army property may be taken over to help ease Christchurch's accommodation shortage.

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) and the New Zealand Defence Force said yesterday that the use of 34 vacant army houses at Burnham and land for relocated red-zoned homes was being discussed.

The property may be needed as the Christchurch City Council has revealed 385 of its social housing units are vacant because of quake damage. The fate of the units remains unknown.

Cera operations deputy general manager Baden Ewart said the Defence Force proposal was in the "early stages".

"We aren't even at the point of discussing the logistics, but Cera certainly sees potential opportunities for using vacant [Defence Force] homes and also for relocating Crown-owned residential red-zone properties into vacant areas on [Defence Force] land," he said.

A Defence Force spokeswoman said the surplus houses would need a "reasonable amount of work" to ensure they were habitable.

Housing requirements for Defence Force personnel were being reviewed to determine whether more units could be made available, she said.

A Canterbury District Health Board member yesterday warned that the housing troubles could lead to a huge increase in demand on the city's health services.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said this week that damaged council and Housing New Zealand units were needed to help alleviate the housing shortage.

Housing NZ had been ordered to fast-track repairs.

A council spokeswoman said yesterday that the time frame for repairs to its units would not be known until engineering reports were completed and insurance and Earthquake Commission (EQC) claims settled.

"The [council is] looking at options available to replace social housing stock so that when insurance and EQC settlements are provided, the council can have options at hand to move into the rebuild phase," she said.

Many of the council units that suffered cosmetic damage were still occupied.

Tenants in a near-empty central Christchurch social housing complex told The Press they were surprised some units were not being used.

Two-thirds of the 115-unit city council-owned complex in Conference St was still vacant yesterday, 14 months after the February 2011 earthquake.

Each of the multi-unit blocks was green-stickered, but a council notice on the door stated that four units could not be occupied because of structural damage.

"All other units in the complex have been assessed as being safe to occupy and tenants may continue to live in their rental units," the notice said.

The council did not provide details on whether the damage to the 73 vacant units was cosmetic or structural.

A resident, who did not want to be named, said her unit was one of only three occupied in the block.

"We did ask the people from the council and they said people don't want to move into town, near the [central-city] red zone."

There had been no noticeable repair work at the complex, she said.

Another resident, who had lived at the complex for more than 10 years, said she had been told the ground-floor units were empty because of damage to sewerage and water pipes.

Many of the tenants were elderly and had moved out immediately after the February quake, she said.

The council yesterday decided not to increase rents for the social housing units.

- The Press

Comments