Around the grounds: How the Rugby World Cup quarterfinalists are shaping up

PHIL WALTER/GETTY IMAGES All Blacks captain Richie McCaw is ready to return for the Rugby World Cup quarterfinal with France in Cardiff.

As the Rugby World Cup enters its knockout phase, RICHARD KNOWLER provides a snapshot of how the tournament's heavy hitters are preparing for the quarterfinals.

NEW ZEALAND

The All Blacks had a light training in sunny Swansea on Monday morning and the big news is captain Richie McCaw is as fit as a trout. The sore hip that ruled him out of the Tonga game in Newcastle won't prevent him playing the quarterfinal against France in Cardiff. First five-eighth Dan Carter was asked whether the loss to the French in the 2007 quarterfinal was preying on the New Zealanders' minds. Nope, he said.

All Blacks v France: Your predictions Share your stories, photos and videos.

Carter stated it was the French who may feel they have more to prove after losing 8-7 to the New Zealanders in the 2011 final. Makes sense.

READ MORE:

* O'Mahony is ruled out of RWC

* The Wallabies are back in black

* France plot to disrupt All Blacks

* All Blacks have nothing to fear

* Carter's cheeky dig at McCaw

AUSTRALIA

The Aussies trained in the morning near their base in Westminster, London, completed their media duties and were then given the freedom to play golf or go to the movies. They have no major injury concerns and flanker Michael Hooper, following his one-week suspension, will be welcomed back for the quarterfinal against Scotland at Twickenham this weekend.

Flanker David Pocock received an official warning by the citing commissioner for some clumsy work during the match against Wales, but is free to play Scotland.

It seems everyone is revelling in the Aussies' success, whether it be in the UK or Down Under: "I had my old man come in on Friday and he told me the buzz back home has been great," said Scott Sio. "It's great that the sport is starting to grow back again to where it was in the early 2000s."

Later in the day the Aussies prepared to move to Teddington, where the All Blacks stayed earlier in the tournament, to knuckle down and train.

BACK THE ALL BLACKS: Join NZ's biggest Mexican Wave

FRANCE

Still licking their wounds following their 24-9 loss to Ireland in Cardiff. Les Bleus, who are based at the Vale Resort in Hensol - the place where Wales are usually camped - near Cardiff accept they need to quickly regroup ahead of their daunting quarterfinal against the All Blacks at Millennium Stadium.

At the press conference French coach Philippe Saint-Andre urged his players to show a fighting spirit: "We have to get ready like a firing squad."

Will he make changes? The answer was along the lines of: maybe, maybe not. Surely he will after his team rarely fired a shot against the Irish.

SOUTH AFRICA

With England out of the competition, the Springboks have migrated to the hosts' plush training base at Pennyhill Park at Bagshot. Their injury count is low and spirits appear to be high after they topped their pool by beating Japan, Samoa and Scotland. The opening defeat to Japan continues to be a talking point but prop Trevor Nyakane said they are doing their best to bury the memory of that result. "All I know is that it happened." Time to move on in other words.

ARGENTINA

Based at the Vale Resort, in the delightfully named Llwynrhyddid Cottages, the Pumas have started to prepare for their match against Ireland in Cardiff.

They will have taken note of the injuries to several key Irish players and will be hoping the citing commissioner sees fit to call Sean O'Brien to account for punching.

Anything that detracts from the Irish side will help boost the Pumas chances of knocking over the top qualifiers from Pool D.

RUGBY WORLD CUP ZONE:

* RWC 2015 Match Centre

* Tournament history

* Best RWC moments

* RWC team profiles

* All Blacks squad

* RWC Fantasy league

* Printable wallchart

WALES

To prepare for their big showdown against South Africa this weekend, Wales coach Warren Gatland has relocated his squad to Weybridge on the outskirts of London.

There isn't enough space here to list all the injured players Gatland has farewelled during the tournament. But you get the picture. They just have to get on with it.

IRELAND

Injuries to captain and lock Paul O'Connell (hamstring) and playmaker Jonny Sexton (adductor) continue to be a hot subject following their 24-9 win over France. Both were to have scans and O'Connell, who spent the night in hospital, is no chance to play against Argentina in Cardiff. What is also certain is that Peter O'Mahony is a goner, having suffered knee ligament damage.

This follows the exit of Kiwi Jared Payne with a broken bone in his foot. Her withdrew before that tenacious effort against France.

Ireland coach Joe Schmidt must play a waiting game to see whether Sean O'Brien will be cited for punching French lock Pascal Pape in the stomach.

SCOTLAND

The Scots, having squeezed past Samoa last weekend to lodge themselves a place in the quarters, had a recovery session at the Royal Grammar School in Newcastle upon Tyne.

Coach Vern Cotter has to deal with some off-field issues, too. Ross Ford and Jonny Gray have been cited for dangerous and lifting tackles, respectively.

Their chances of playing the Wallabies will be determined by a hearing this week.

- Stuff