By Jarrod Booker

All Black superstar Dan Carter says he will not be forced out by Christchurch's earthquakes despite his home being hit once again.

Carter, 29, spent a night at his parents' home in Southbridge, about 45km out of Christchurch, after Monday's big quakes left his house in eastern Christchurch with "a few more cracks" and without water and power.

He was training at Christchurch's Rugby Park when the 5.7 and 6.3 magnitude quakes struck, and arrived home to see the return of the liquefaction silt and sludge that hit his property in the February 22 disaster.

Yesterday, Carter and his fellow Crusaders boarded a chartered DC-3 to Wellington for tonight's Super 15 game against the Hurricanes - a move forced by this week's volcanic ash disruption to regular flights - but he says he will return.

His fiancee, Honor Dillon, lives in Auckland and there has been speculation about a move north, but Carter told the Weekend Herald he had not considered a shift.

He recently re-signed to play rugby in New Zealand for a further four years.

"I've got my Mum and Dad's house ... They don't feel [the quakes] as bad out there, so I have always got that security of going out and having a nice cooked meal by my Mum - which is always nice."

Carter said the silt and sludge had come out of the ground into his driveway and "all around the house".

"It's just more annoying than anything. Just for it to resurface is frustrating. It didn't come in through the house, which was a bonus."

He said he had received help from his clubmates to clean up.

"I had a few of the Southbridge rugby boys around on Wednesday, so that was bloody good of them."

His neighbours had also helped.

Carter's All Black team-mate Kieran Read also had to deal with liquefaction on his property again.

On his day off, Read had a team helping at his home to clear the silt and sludge, but a layer of mud still covers the grass in his yard.

"It definitely does get to you, but I suppose it's just part and parcel of it, and you have just got to do what you can," Read said. "You can't really control it."

All Black Zac Guildford was at home with injured fellow Crusaders Sean Maitland and Israel Dagg when Monday's quakes struck and the "hot water cylinder decided it wanted to move out of the cupboard and sort of exploded".

"So it was like a waterfall coming from the second floor down the stairs ... and through the ceiling onto the first floor," Guildford said.

When the second and largest quake hit, all three got out of their townhouse as quickly as they could.

"Issy and Sean have both got sore legs and I think they moved faster than me, so there's no excuse for them not playing this week," Guildford joked.

He said the townhouse was cracked and seemed unsafe, so he had not been back since Monday.

- NZ Herald