Fifty per cent of Christchurch now has a basic mains water supply following Tuesday's earthquake but people should still conserve water and boil it before drinking, the city's Civil Defence management says.

Seventy-five per cent of the city now has power as improvements to the power supply were being made daily but "progress may be slow due to road damage, as much of the damage to electricity network is underground".

This morning, Civil Defence said that if people had mains water supply they could flush their toilets but if there were any signs of blockage or overflow to stop flushing as it might be an indication of damaged pipes.

Two hundred portable toilets have been distributed and another 1200 are to due to arrive in the city.

Residents were reminded to bring water to the boil once, allow it to settle, and then bring to the boil again. This included water taken from tankers.

If unable to boil water, add one tsp of bleach to 10 litres of water and leave for 30 minutes before use.

The army has desalination plants processing 5000 litres of water per hour. These are available in Lyttelton and New Brighton, which will start working at 7am today.

Basic functionality has been established at Bromley Waste Water Treatment Plant.

One hundred teams, as part of Operation Suburb, will be heading out from 9am today to door-knock in the most affected areas - Brighton, Dallington, Avonside, Parklands/Queen's Park, Sumner/Redcliffs, St Martins/Opawa, Lyttelton and Bays, Woolston/Ferrymead, Hoonhay, Richmond/St Albans, Fendalton / Merivale, and Aranui / Bromley.

The teams will obtain a picture of the health and safety of building occupants and the state of building stock for residential buildings only.

They will carry official identification.

Emergency water supplies are available at the welfare centres and free-standing water tanks will be replenished at the following sites today:

* From 9am to 9.30am and from 2pm to 2.30pm: St Albans, Cranford/English Park; Hammersley, Quinns Road; Marihau, Innes/Mahars; Waimari, Tilman/Blighs; West Spreydon, Lyttelton St.

* From 11pm to 11.30am and from 4pm to 4.30pm: Richmond, Alexandra/Pavitt; Banks Avenue; Burwood, New Brighton; Nth New Brighton, Leaver St; Wharenui, Matipo St; Somerfield, Somerfield St.

* All day: Queenspark, Queenspark Ave; Pioneer Stadium; Cowles Stadium; Redcliffs; Shirley Primary; Parklands Mall; Diamond Harbour First School; Governor's Bay Fire Station; Lyttelton Main School; Lyttelton Port; New Brighton; Brooklands; Mansfield Hospital; Shirley Intermediate; Disraeli Reserve; Heaton Intermediate; Manning Intermediate; Cashmere, Hackthorne; Beckenham, Norwood; St Martins, Albert/Roscoe; Woolston, Ferry/Hopkins; Mt Pleasant, Hornbrook; Sumner, Hardwick/Colenso; Bromley, Kawau; North Linwood, Woodham.

The water needs to be boiled before being used for drinking. People must bring their own container to the sites. If it rains, collect water in buckets. Save all water for drinking.

The water needs to be boiled before being used for drinking. People must bring their own container to the sites. If it rains, collect water in buckets. Save all water for drinking.

- NZPA