By Andrew Koubaridis

Authorities in earthquake-hit Canterbury are now operating under new powers given to them by Parliament after the state of emergency was lifted yesterday, 12 days after the 7.1 magnitude tremor.

The state of emergency caused by the September 4 quake was lifted at midday in the Christchurch City Council, Waimakariri and Selwyn district areas.

While the massive jolt caused widespread damage, no one was killed and only a handful of injuries were recorded.

One estimate yesterday suggested the disaster could cost insurers between $2.1 and $3.5 billion, which would make it the fifth most expensive earthquake for insurers.

With the lifting of the state of emergency the councils are now operating under the new powers brought in under the Canterbury Earthquake Response and Recovery Bill, passed by Parliament under urgency earlier this week.

Christchurch Mayor Bob Parker said the city was moving "from a state of emergency to a state of urgency".

But he warned even though the situation was switching from a civil defence situation to closer to business as normal, many still faced "great difficulties".

Resolving those issues was a key issue for him and the other mayors, he said.

Police and the Army will continue their 24/7 patrol of affected suburbs despite the state of emergency being lifted.

"We want to reassure the public that criminals can expect to be stopped by police," Canterbury District Commander Superintendent Dave Cliff said. "Residents with any concerns about people acting suspiciously in their neighbourhood should not hesitate to call police on 111."

Risk Management Solutions [RMS] said as many as 6000 buildings could be damaged, placing the Canterbury quake among eight earthquakes to cost more than $1 billion.

Top of the list was the 1994 Northridge, California earthquake which cost insurers $22 billion.

"The potential that claims will be assessed 'generously', in particular when older buildings get reconstructed to the latest building code" would increase insurer losses, said Robert Muir-Wood, chief research officer at Newark, California-based RMS.

A spokesman from the Earthquake Commission told the Herald yesterday about 58,000 insurance claims had been received so far, with 1000 assessments being completed.

The first settlement cheques, mainly for minor contents damage, were now being sent out.

The spokesman said 65 loss adjusters from Australia had flown to Canterbury to assist local staff.

In the Waimakariri district, a recovery assistance centre will open next week in Kaiapoi to support residents. The town was one of the hardest hit areas with about 100 homesleft unliveable and up to 300 others badly damaged.

The centre will open Monday to Friday from 9am to 4.30pm in the Kaiapoi Community Centre, from September 20.

"Not only is there months of work ahead of us to reinstate crumbled infrastructure, but as a community we also need to be conscious of the tough times ahead for the dozens of residents who still have to deal with the loss of their homes.

"We will all need to do what we can to support them through it," Waimakariri Mayor Ron Keating said.

Residents in Kaiapoi, Pines Beach and Kairaki are reminded to continue to boil their water for three minutes before drinking, as e. coli has been found in the water for a second time.

- ADDITIONAL REPORTING: NZPA

- NZ Herald