By Roger Moroney

Hawke's Bay and Christchurch, through disaster, now share a common and tragic bond. Both have suffered terrible earthquakes. Roger Moroney looks at the two events that occurred almost exactly 80 years apart.

It was only in the days of unfolding tragedy in the wake of the Christchurch earthquake that Hawke's Bay people began thinking about the slightly eerie connections.

It happened in February, the same month as the 1931 disaster.

It happened just 19 days after services had been held in Napier and Hastings commemorating the 80th anniversary of the Hawke's Bay earthquake.

Both events had happened on a Tuesday and they happened just two hours and five minutes apart.

At the inner harbour port of Napier, a Navy ship, HMS Veronica, was moored - fortuitously as it turned out as the crew were on hand to assist almost immediately.

At the Port of Lyttleton, a Navy ship, HMNZS Canterbury, was moored.

The NZ Defence Force had been preparing for a large exercise in the region and assets were immediately diverted to the rescue effort - the ship's timely positioning allowed an immediate response with the unloading of personnel, vehicles and equipment into the damaged areas.

The now ageing survivors of the 1931 Hawke's Bay earthquake remember it with great clarity - such was the imprint it left on their emotions. They know what the people of the southern city are going through.

My mother, a schoolgirl during the 1931 earthquake and who was left terrified by what she went through, summed up the Christchurch disaster simply, but with words as apt and effective as any.



"Oh those poor people, those poor people."

Both earthquakes struck cruelly at times when people were out and about on a summer's day.

Time for lunch, for shopping, for play.

Another summer's day, although the season itself had been an unsettling one in Christchurch as aftershocks, hundreds of them, continued with unsettling regularity after the September 4 earthquake which, while larger, was deeper and occurred at a time when few people were up and about.

But as they were in Hawke's Bay in 1931, many people were up and about when the second big quake struck, going about their lives in the pretty city of Christchurch, when the earth erupted.

The death toll says a lot. It is high and growing, and reflects the severity of the shake.

But comparisons of severity as determined by the Richter scale do not really apply.

The Hawke's Bay earthquake was recorded at 7.8, while the Christchurch event was 6.3.

But its depth created the tragedy.

It was just 5km down - the Hawke's Bay quake was estimated to be 20km deep.

It was centred about 15km north of Napier. The Christchurch quake was 10km east of the city and was delivered with quick but lethal ferocity.

"Fifteen seconds of violent shaking," was one description.

The Hawke's Bay earthquake was effectively two devastating events.

The first was a distinct upwards bump, followed by a violent swaying motion which grew in intensity before everything went still ... for about 30 seconds.

There was clearly damage, but some later spoke of relief it had not gone longer.

But it was short-lived relief for the violence had not finished. It returned with a violent swaying and rocking motion - lasting two-and-a-half minutes since the start of the first shake.

While it lasted longer than the Christchurch shake, in terms of ferocity they were similar.

In the words of 89-year-old Christchurch resident Bob McCombe, who went through the 1931 event as a 10-year-old boy, and who endured the February 22 quake, there was "a definite comparison".

He had harboured a life-long fear of earthquakes after the trauma of the Napier event and the latest Christchurch quake had shattered his nerves. He has decided to move out of the city for a time to recover.

Confusion, fear, uncertainty and panic are quickly manufactured by such events which strike quickly and without warning.

When lives are clearly lost, trauma joins that terrible list.

Latest police estimates are pointing to a final death toll of about 240 people - a figure again eerily close to the toll in Hawke's Bay, which was 256.

Searchers and rescuers spoke of "horrific" scenes of destruction and death in Napier and Hastings - their words have been echoed in Christchurch.

In both tragedies, it was the determination to roll up sleeves and get on with the job that kept spirits up. Volunteers sprang forward. Neighbours helped neighbours.

Television and radio, along with texts, had the news of the Christchurch earthquake spread across the country within minutes.

Back in 1931, as communication lines crashed down, it was a message from the radio operator of the Veronica which alerted Devonport Naval Base that "something terrible" had befallen the region.

But like it was in the hours after the Christchurch quake, things moved quickly and two Navy cruisers, Diomede and Dunedin, were dispatched to Napier carrying food, medicine and tents as well as medical teams.

Army troops, Red Cross, police and fire teams also assembled and quickly headed for Hawke's Bay.

The Navy responded on February 22 with Pukaki and Otago joining Canterbury taking supplies and personnel. Reservists joined the work.

In 1931, there was no quick way of getting people and machinery into the region. It was effectively road or sea. And no overseas specialist search and rescue agencies to call upon. Napier also had to contend with major fires.

Recent reports have it that 10,000 people will be requiring temporary accommodation in Christchurch.

In 1931, about 2500 people were in need of food and shelter in the immediate days after the earthquake.

It has to be put into perspective that the population of Christchurch is 330,000 - Napier's was 16,000 in 1931 and Hastings 11,000.

An estimated 5000 people left Napier in the days following the disaster - an estimated 70,000 people had left Christchurch by the end of this week.

In terms of cost, the Government is quoting a figure of $20 billion to restore Christchurch.

In 1931, the restoration figure was put at £7 million - about $5 billion today.

As it was in Hawke's Bay, and to use the words of Crowded House's Neil Finn who dedicated Don't Dream It's Over to the people of Christchurch during the band's Napier concert last Saturday - "there's a battle ahead".

<inline type="photogallery" id="8001" align="outside" embed="no" />

- Hawkes Bay Today