By Paul Harper

After the February earthquake destroyed their Avonside hair salon, Sandra Sinclair and Lisa Fisher went mobile, visiting clients in their homes.

"But it was too hard, so we set up on the front lawn," Sandra says.

For three weeks now the pair have operated Star Style from a Portacom on Sandra's Pembroke Road home's front lawn.

Inside the new salon it is easy to forget you are in a Portacom, with a hair-washing basin, three mirrors and stools, the walls covered in patterned vinyl, and shelves stocked full with hair products.

"It took three or four weeks to deck it out," Sandra says. "Every time we get an earthquake the stock falls over. The stock is all Blu-Tacked to the shelves."

Now the hairdressing pair must start over again, as yesterday's Government announcement confirmed the land beneath Sandra's home has been condemned.

"I'm more heartbroken [that] I've lost my business. Everything I've worked so hard for. I just want to cry," she said after learning her home is in the red zone.

"I don't know what we'll do now - most of our clients are from around here."

Lisa got different news to her friend, but the future remains as uncertain.

"Our home is in the green zone. But our land is all over the place. How can we stay there?"

The situation became more "final" for Lisa after yesterday's announcement.

"It's a bit numbing actually."

One of Star Style's clients getting her hair done yesterday was Ella Hanton, a retiree who lives with her husband Tom on nearby Avonside Drive.

Sandra showed her the website which says her home of 43 years is to go too.

"There's nothing wrong with the house. That's because my husband built the house. It's the land."

She says she does not want to live next to a river in the future.

"I just feel sorry for all the residents over 65," Sandra says.

"Ella and Tom - they really thought they could live in their house.

"I think it is good they can move on and get out."

Sandra believes most of her customers are in the same position as the Hantons.

"Eighty per cent of my clients are in the red zone. I'll probably lose my business."

She says she will lose money on her home - which has been renovated since the last government valuation in 2007, but fighting the Government is not worth it.

"Christchurch is home. Our family is here. Our friends are here. Our lives are here.

"And now it is gone."