By Cassandra Mason



Newly-announced earthquake strengthening regulations are a blanket approach which don't cater for low-risk areas like Northland, Whangarei acting mayor Phil Halse says.

The Government has set a 20-year deadline for assessing 193,000 buildings nationally for earthquake risk and carrying out strengthening.

Up to 25,000 buildings nationwide are believed to be at risk of collapse in a moderate quake.

Mr Halse said the extended time frame would be "more than welcome" for people who needed to upgrade their buildings.

Financial incentives for building owners were important to make sure the work was done to the right standard and this was the Government's responsibility, he said.

However, as Northland was a low-risk earthquake area, it was unfortunate there were no concessions for the region.

"It does seem to be a bit out of the ordinary. The region should have been assessed before they went for a blanket [approach]."

Regardless, Whangarei needed to comply, he said.

Housing and Construction Minister Maurice Williamson said all commercial buildings and high-rise, multi-unit apartments will have to be assessed for earthquake risk within five years. Any building found to be at risk of collapse will have to be strengthened or demolished within another 15 years to 34 per cent of the new national building standard.

The policy forms the Government's response to a Royal Commission inquiry into earthquake-prone buildings after the Canterbury quakes.

Owners will now have 15 years to bring their quake-prone buildings up to standard after assessment, instead of the original proposal of 10 years - a time frame Mr Williamson said would have put too much pressure on building owners.

Every percentage point increase of the new national building standard equated to $700 million in new costs for owners.

Financial incentives would be offered to building owners who strengthened their buildings, though the details would not be confirmed until later in the year.

Government has also agreed that the most precious heritage buildings will have a further 10 years to be strengthened.

Property Council chief Connal Townsend said strengthening heritage buildings was "like open-heart surgery", and it was possible that some upgrades would not occur within the 20-year timeframe.



At a glance





Between 15,000 and 25,000 buildings believed to be at risk of collapse in a moderate earthquake.

Between 15,000 and 25,000 buildings believed to be at risk of collapse in a moderate earthquake.



The Alpine fault, the most likely source of a catastrophic New Zealand earthquake, has a 6 to 9 per cent chance of rupturing in the next 20 years.

The Alpine fault, the most likely source of a catastrophic New Zealand earthquake, has a 6 to 9 per cent chance of rupturing in the next 20 years.



The Wellington Fault, which runs under the city's CBD, produces a large earthquake every 500 to 1000 years.

The Wellington Fault, which runs under the city's CBD, produces a large earthquake every 500 to 1000 years.



Since 1843, 483 people have died in quakes.

Since 1843, 483 people have died in quakes.



Unreinforced masonry buildings resulted in the death of 39 people in the February 22, 2011 earthquake in Christchurch.



- Northern Advocate