By Carly Gibbs

In 2005, Terry Wynyard was the man helping Tauranga residents rebuild their lives after the May floods. Now in 2011, he is helping the residents of Christchurch rebuild theirs. Wynyard talks candidly about picking up the pieces, fate, family and life changing moments.



Terry Wynyard cuts a smart figure. He was wearing a blue and white checked shirt and a Fossil watch.

He'd flown up from Christchurch the night before our interview and was tired - but he didn't show it.

He took control of the interview and talked so fluidly, I didn't need to do much interviewing. That was a good thing.

Wynyard's a natural storyteller and true to what I'd been told before meeting him - by many people - "a really nice guy".

He also believes in fate.

Wynyard stood for Tauranga City Council last year to "test the water" and while 6500 people voted for him, it wasn't enough.

He was okay with that.

"I know why I wasn't elected because there was a bigger picture for Terry Wynyard and I'm doing it, so that's quite special," he says.

Wynyard worked at Tauranga City Council for 22 years and was the disaster recovery manager at the time of his departure. He left in January and now operates his own business Wynyard Dispute Resolution.

"I'm 59 years old and it's time for me to do some other things. I love the area and [that] job but I needed to go and do some other stuff.".

Fair enough.

"We go through our lives a lot of us and there's still a gap; something I'd like to do and haven't done. For me, what I'm doing now fills that gap, it really does."

Wynyard first went to Christchurch in September last year and worked with the Ministry for Civil Defence and the New Zealand Insurance Council.

In December, Wynyard was contracted by the Earthquake Commission (EQC) to assist with land remediation work in Christchurch and expects to be working for them for some time yet.

He flies down to Christchurch at 6.35am every Monday and returns to Tauranga every Thursday night. He lives by the beach in Mount Maunganui.

He says the level of disaster in Christchurch is "hundreds" times bigger than that of Tauranga's May, 2005 floods, for which he co-ordinated the emergency response. He adds that managing the recovery is the same though: "It's just a matter of scale."

Physically sick is how he felt after getting a bird's eye view of Christchurch in an Iroquois after the February 22 quake.

"It was absolutely huge and bigger than anything you'd ever seen, particularly in our lovely country."

Did he know anyone in Christchurch at the time of the September and February quakes?

He says a couple. Months on, he has a real soft spot for Canterbury.

"I love it," he declares. "I think Cantabrians are amazing people.

"They're very resilient, they're quite stoic, very proud of their city, and it's very sad to see the destruction."

Understandably, he, like all Cantabrians though, is finding the aftershocks terribly scary. Wynyard is still reeling from a 5.3 magnitude aftershock last Tuesday. He sat bolt upright in bed at 3.15am.

"Things were creaking and rattling and rocking and rolling so it was pretty scary stuff.

"I thought, is this thing going to get any worse? You freak. There's no little warning bell that goes to say there's a magnitude 6.3 earthquake coming and run for cover."

I suspect he must be relieved to get home to Tauranga. And he is, a little bit. But he's happy to be doing his bit to help our Southern cousins.

"I'm a pretty compassionate guy," he says earnestly. "I'm not an expert on seismic activity but I've learnt a lot about it, like most Kiwis have."

From his spot at the cafe we're at, he looks out to Mid City Mall and says: "I'm always mindful of what might happen. If I was walking through here, I'd walk well away from the buildings. If I was in Christchurch I'd walk under the verandas.

"In a building, I'll visualise where I'm going to. Outside rather than walk round barricades, I'll cross the street."

Tauranga has earthquake prone buildings too but he says in the same breath: "At the end of the day you can't be so paranoid with life you can't live it."

It's been important for Wynyard to resume normal activities when he returns to Tauranga and have a break from the disaster zone.

He and his wife of seven years, Maggie, go cruising on his Italian Moto Guzzi motorbike, they go walking, and Wynyard reads non-fiction. The latest title by his bed is Ray Avery's autobiography.

Back by the beach he is removed from the fragility of his weekday home.

"While it's one thing to re-build infrastructure and buildings, it's another thing to re-build the social and physiological networks and that really does concern me just as a person. I think I'm reasonably empathetic." ..

It is clear that memories of the events and the times following remain with him.

"For a lot of people living in Tauranga you probably can't even begin to imagine the magnitude of what's actually happened but we can't forget it. It's real. Everything we do to re-build the city takes time, takes money, takes a lot of effort and it's going to be like that for a long time It's going to be a different city."

Of his own job, he says: "There's no end in sight at this particular time."

An average day for Wynyard sees him leaving his city hotel at 7am, walking to his office on the other side of Hagley Park. Then he spends his days helping with land remediation work in Kaiapoi, which is close to the mouth of the Waimakariri River. Kaiapoi was severely effected by liquefaction and lateral spread in the September earthquake. Hundreds of homes need to be demolished and rebuilt. "Engineers have developed perimeter treatment works around, outside, or in stopbanks already there. It's like an underground retaining wall or dam."

Even for someone who is used to dealing with emergencies it has been "bewildering".

Across Canterbury about 10,000 homes need to be demolished and rebuilt.

Wynyard works 10 hours a day in Christchurch and it's "all go". He unwinds on a Tuesday night with friend Greg Wilson, who is seconded to the Canterbury Earthquake Authority. The pair have pizza and wine.

"It's cool".

Wynyard likes to think he is helping is some small way.

"... It's a bit like throwing a stone in the puddle. The stone won't empty the puddle but it'll create a few ripples and if i can do that, that'll be fine - create a few ripples. Helping our own brothers and sisters in Canterbury is fantastic ... is wonderful."

Close friend of Wynyard's, Dynes McConnell, says Wynyard has the perfect balance of being able to deal with the professional matters at hand and remain empathetic.

"It's certainly impacted on him [working down there]," he says over the phone. "He's got a good heart and you can't be down there and not be affected by that."

McConnell says Wynyard is a faithful friend and a born leader.

"When we go on motorbike rides, he'll lead and he'll organise the trip," he laughs.

He says Wynyard, who perhaps was too modest to tell me himself, is a very good guitarist and collector of guitars. He's also competed in a number of marathons.

Something else you might not know about him is he has Parkinson's disease.

I said I wanted to know something quirky about him, as I often asl my interviewees. After chuckling and joking "Like what? I'm not a cross dresser or anything," he surprised me by saying: "I guess, I um, I don't know how you put this but I suffer from Parkinson's disease."

It was an honest moment.

He quickly added with testament to his resilience: "I'm determined I'm not going to let that get me."

Diagnosed at the end of 2005, Wynyard says Parkinsons and its challenges are part of him now.

"I'm not going to let that stop me.

"I have something that I can offer, I'm not silly. I keep reasonably good health because I look after myself and I think it's so important to keep the brain active and if I can make a difference to other people's lives who have got Parkinsons, then I'd like to share my story with them because it's not the end of the world when it happens. You haven't been given a death sentence, you've been given the unfortunate situation where you have got this thing you have to live with and you manage your life the best way you can."

It's a brave and empowering statement. I ask if he takes medication. He says "yes - a number of times a day" and he's actually due to take it now.

He keeps fit and active, has a good diet, gets plenty of rest and doesn't drink too much red wine.

"I didn't say don't drink red wine," he laughs.

Today, his life has resumed some semblance of normality because it's a Friday and he's home for the weekend. He's even got time to fit in a haircut, he tells me.

He'll spend the weekend with his wife - "she misses me and I miss her. It's always nice to come home" - and his two sons who live with their mother, Robert 17, and Steven, 15. "They're good kids," he says. He also has three adult step-children, Lisa, Julie and Tim.

His dog Milo, will demand a few walks down the beach - "he's a cool little guy".

As we ended our interview, and stepped outside the cafe the air was biting. Although not as cold as Christchurch, Wynyard noted. He tapped me on the shoulder and told me it was lovely meeting me and "thank you so much for taking the time".

It's usually me, the journalist, doing the thanking.

Yes, he really is a nice guy.

- Bay of Plenty Times