By Kurt Bayer, Anna Leask, Anna Turner of the Star, APNZ, Herald Online

The parents of a man who died saving the life of an elderly woman in the fatal quake are now the caretakers of a rare award bestowed on city in the wake of it's "darkest day".

140 Royal Humane Society awards for service and heroism were given out to Cantabrians who risked life and limb to save others, and helped keep the city together in the grim weeks that followed.

One of those people recognised was Joe Pohio, a well liked and respected staffer at the Christchurch City Council.

Mr Pohio was helping a woman who was trapped and injured in Cashel Mall when an aftershock hit, crushing him under rubble.

Mr Pohio's parents Arnold and Joy were at the service to accept the award on his behalf, but became the caretakers of another major accolade as well.

A Royal Humane Society gold medal was awarded to the citizens of Christchurch - to all those who helped and cared for others after the quake.

The last time the medal was awarded to such a large group was in 1968 after the Wahine Disaster.

Governor General Sir Jerry Mataparae presented the award to Mayor Bob Parker, who accepted it briefly before handing it over to Mr and Mrs Pohia.

"So this is yours," he said to the crowd in Hagley Park, holding it aloft.

"There are so many stories of bravery in the community. We're going to honour a number of those shortly. But I want one person to take care of this medal."

He then asked Mr an Mrs Pohia, carrying a framed photo of their heroic son, to do the honour.

"He lost his life. One life was saved by his action and in that action, Joe lost his own life. So, will you hold this piece of our communal city treasure?"

As the couple accepted the medal, the crowd rose to their feet in a standing ovation, applauding Mr Pohio's bravery and sacrifice.

Mr Parker then revealed that another round of awards would follow later in the year.

He said today's presentations were sure to stir more memories of heroic and selfless acts, and nominations would open for more awards soon.

Prime Minister John Key said he was honoured to be at the presentations.

"In the worst of times, we see the best of New Zealanders," he said.

"In such times of tragedy New Zealanders really step up to help their fellow human beings and in doing so help their friends and their community.

"This is not a thing we have experienced before... it was a scene of great horror... there were some incredible acts of bravery. It is absolutely right that we have recognised that today," he said.

He personally thanked everyone who showed courage, bravery and sensitivity - which would never be forgotten.

Mr Mataparae was "deeply humbled" to be amongst the recipients.

"To have this opportunity to acknowledge and honour those who risked their lives in the aftermath of the devastating earthquake," he said.

"In the gravest moment in our history - bravery and courage were so abundantly displayed."

Others honoured today included Chris Nutsford, who risked his life by climbing onto the collapsed PGC building and cutting through wood to rescue three women trapped on the third floor.

Many recipients, such as Erwin Polczak who freed four people trapped under rubble, risked their own lives to save others.

Others offered time and resources to help those in need in the weeks following the quake.

Melanie Hillier organised more than 200 a meals a day from her Aranui home using a generator, as she had no power or water.

She also distributed second-hand clothing and furniture to those in need and has helped to give neighbourhood children a 'quake-escape' to Hanmer Springs and Little River.

Aucklander Mark Skelton built a self-sufficient truck that provided up to 500 showers a day for residents without power or water.

See the full list of Earthquake Award recipients here

Society president Austin Forbes said the medal commemorated and marked the "countless and incredible acts of bravery'' in the aftermath of the disaster.

Forbes says it is the first time in 44 years that the society has awarded a gold medal and likened it to one handed out to rescuers involved in the Wahine disaster.

Prime Minister John Key told award winners their "courage, bravery and sensitivity'' would "never be forgotten''.

Community help

Meanwhile, 41 community groups funded by the Government have been recognised for the way they have worked over the last year supporting families, the community and each other after the Christchurch earthquakes.

The Greater Canterbury Social Sector Awards were given by the Greater Canterbury Community Response Forum, a group of community and government representatives responsible for improving the delivery of social services across Canterbury.

They were presented by Amy Adams, Associate Minister for Canterbury Earthquake Recovery and forum member Sue McKenzie at the Christchurch Social Sector Awards ceremony which was held at the Chateau on the Park after the Memorial Service today.

Forum spokesman Terry Donaldson said the way the community sector responded to events following the earthquakes deserves to be acknowledged.

The Canterbury community sector has shown extraordinary leadership. Their responsiveness to the needs of families and communities following the earthquakes and the innovative ways they worked together, and with government, meant that the impact on families was lessened, he said.