An investigation is underway into a sexual harassment complaint against Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority chief executive Roger Sutton.

The State Services Commission has now confirmed the investigation into Mr Sutton's conduct had been carried out following a complaint from a CERA staff member.

State Services Commissioner Iain Rennie said he took any issues relating to the conduct of public service chief executives seriously.

"Every state servant must be able to work in a safe environment where they are treated with professionalism and respect.

"I received the investigation report yesterday and I am now communicating my response to the relevant parties.

"The outcome of this process will be made public as early as possible next week."

The commission had ensured the complainant was being appropriately supported through the process and would continue to receive any ongoing support required, Mr Rennie said.

As his employer, the commission had also provided appropriate support to Mr Sutton through the process, he said.

"To protect the privacy of all parties involved in this complaint and to respect undertakings of confidentiality, the investigation report and details of the exact nature of the complaint will not be released, even after my decision has been made public."

Mr Sutton has remained in his role while the investigation was carried out and appropriate steps were being taken to manage the situation while the investigation was taking place.

Earlier, Fairfax reported Mr Sutton had been accused of harassing a senior female staffer, including making inappropriate jokes, comments and giving her an unwelcome hug.

The findings by the State Services Commission was expected to be delivered next week.

Mr Sutton told The Press he was horrified when he heard of the allegations.

"I can be a larrikin and make stupid silly jokes. It is a very difficult, stressful job and I've sometimes used humour to cope.

"But I'm not the victim. I've made some stupid mistakes."

He said he was confident the inquiry would come to a "fair and proper conclusion".

"I realise a chief executive in the public service has high thresholds of behaviour and sometimes I have not met those standards," he told The Press.

"I have behaved in a juvenile and stupid way and I'm not proud of that.

"I'm an over-the-top, out-there sort of person and that has often made me successful in this role but it is also my Achilles heel."

Sutton said he would decide his future over the next few days.

The State Services Commission would not comment on the investigation but confirmed to The Press that Mr Sutton had not been stood down from the role of chief executive.

- NZME.