Video will play in Play now Don't auto play

Never auto play

Missing out on big matches could become the new normal for Christchurch after failing to secure a test in the 2017 Lions tour.

The decision to award two tests to Eden Park and the third to Westpac Stadium should be a wake-up call for the city, according to Crusaders and Canterbury chief executive Hamish Riach, which currently lacks a stadium suitable for big-ticket events.

With AMI Stadium in its current capacity seating only 18,000, Riach is fearful it could be 10-15 years before Australia play again in Christchurch, a future that would be "awful" for the region.

"There's this great big grey area going forward," Riach told Veitch on Sport on Newstalk ZB today. "What is the future of Christchurch in the test match allocations? It's a really troubling question.

"I guess the silver lining [to the Lions snub] will be that it's a wake-up call down here.

Perhaps there will be a realisation that, in order to take part in the very biggest events, Christchurch is going to have to deal with its stadium."

With the old AMI Stadium still in a state of disrepair after earthquakes ravaged the region in 2010 and 2011, plans were in place two years ago for a 35,000-seat replacement to be built. But coming with a $500 million estimated price tag, the proposal was shelved as Christchurch continues to rebuild in other areas, leaving Cantabrians out in the cold when it comes to allocating All Blacks tests.

"Our point all along is that it's part of the rebuild," Riach said. "It's not the top priority but it is part of the rebuild and there should be a decent stadium in this city. We should be seeing some plans and talking about some designs but none of that is happening at the moment.

"The stadium has been squeezed out of that debate because it's not the most important thing. I'm hoping this decision will be a wake-up call and that we do want big events in this city."

In addition to securing a test against the Springboks in 2016, Christchurch will get a taste of the Lions tour when the tourists clash with the Crusaders, but that result was scant consolation after bidding to take a full part in the tour. While Riach admitted it was a financially sound decision to take two Lions tests to the 45,000-seat Eden Park, he argued the All Blacks should be about more than the bottom line.

"If you think they should make the most money, then it's a no-brainer," he said. "But if you say the All Blacks are a team for the country, then you start to put the money question to one side."

- NZ Herald