One of the Canterbury rebuild's most influential figures has today stepped down to take a top job with a private housebuilder.

Warwick Isaacs, former chief executive of Timaru District Council, came to Christchurch in the aftermath of the February 22, 2011 earthquake to help with the Civil Defence response.

He then joined the newly-established Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) to oversee the emergency demolition of hundreds of quake-damaged buildings.

From then, he became "Mr Rebuild" and for the past two years has overseen a $4 billion work programme.

Today, Cera announced that Mr Isaacs will leave at the end of March to become chief executive at Stonewood Homes.

He said it was a big personal decision to leave his current role having been involved since the first days after the quakes.

"The time is right for me to take up another new challenge but still retain my strong links with the community," he said.

Cera acting chief executive John Ombler said the departure of Mr Isaacs was a huge loss for the organisation, given his long-standing role within the leadership team.

"There are few people who have been so intrinsically involved in the rebuild of this city," Mr Ombler said.

"Warwick was here from February 23, 2011 in a Civil Defence capacity, and essentially never returned to his normal Timaru life. He joined CERA as a deputy chief executive, and then took on the mammoth task of leading the Christchurch Central Development Unit.

"He went from being Mr Emergency to Mr Demolition to Mr Rebuild, and for the past two years has been overseeing a $4 billion work programme - that's a huge commitment to this city over the past four years."

Mr Ombler said Mr Isaacs' strong leadership had guided the city's physical rebuild through the uncertainty that followed the unprecedented natural disaster Christchurch experienced.

Former Christchurch International Airport boss Jim Boult has also been appointed as chairman of Stonewood's board.

Stonewood founder Brent Mettrick said both men will "add huge value" to the company, which is one of the major housebuilders in the recovering region.

- NZME.