By Laurel Stowell

Wanganui is to be one of the stakeholders in a five-year national study on how to cope with earthquakes.

Auckland University's Jason Ingham was in town on June 26 to ask the opinion of the city's Earthquake-prone Buildings Community Taskforce on research priorities. Professor Ingham is handling the buildings side of Quake CoRE, a research programme hosted by Canterbury University.

He said Wanganui would make use of the findings, had been active on earthquake-prone buildings and had made submissions on the subject.

His research team used one of David Corney's Victoria Ave buildings to test the ability of wooden floors and X-shaped metal braces to hold unreinforced brick buildings together under extreme shaking. The results formed part of six seminars given nationwide.

Professor Ingham would like to do more testing in Wanganui, especially on the ability of canopies to protect people below from falling masonry. But he said that would need more funding.

His latest research is still about buildings but focused more on people's perception of how safe they are and how willing they are to pay the costs of preservation. . A lot of that information will come from surveys. He had students doing surveys in Dunedin and Napier in June.

Professor Ingham said earthquakes were severe but infrequent, so people tended to forget the risk. Their willingness to pay to bring old brick buildings up to standard depended on rental value - lower in Wanganui than Auckland.

"Often the people who most value heritage aren't necessarily the ones who are making an investment in the heritage," he said.

An example is the Christchurch cathedral. A lot of people wanted it rebuilt - but they were not offering to pay for it.

Owners can be helped by subsidies and lower rates, but that depends on a community's willingness to pay. Professor Ingham has looked at the way this is done in overseas cities, but said he hadn't found a single right answer.

"Some examples are more successful than others, but no best way of doing it has emerged."

He started his engineering career with concrete bridges and freeways. Old brick buildings like Wanganui's came later, but he likes them.

"It's not possible to work with heritage buildings without falling in love with them."

Professor Ingham doesn't think New Zealand's reaction to the Christchurch earthquakes has been extreme. "It's beholden on all of us to act appropriately while memories are fresh, because it's human nature to forget after a while. We are responsible to future generations to act appropriately now."

And he thinks this latest research is important because people in his generation and younger are "getting on board with history" - with increasing Anzac Day attendance as an example. "It just seems to me there's a lot more talk about heritage buildings than there was a decade ago."

- Wanganui Chronicle