Rebecca Quilliam is senior reporter at the NZME. News Service office in Wellington.

The findings of an investigation into the psychological effects of survivors of the 2010 and 2011 Christchurch earthquakes will be presented in Paris by Christchurch University researchers next month.

The 28th International Congress of Applied Psychology will be told the results so far point to substantial long-term effects of natural disasters on individual health and wellbeing which in turn impact communities and businesses.

Beyond the immediate effects, the sustained exposure to major quakes and aftershocks and associated stressors such as loss of property, disruption to family life and disruption to work life explains the decline in physical and mental health, the research said.

Researcher and Christchurch University's Psychology Department head Professor Simon Kemp said that business relocation decisions had a significant impact on the lifestyle and wellbeing of city residents.

They affected availability of employment, residential areas, transportation systems, leisure centres, and valued community buildings, he said.

But findings from Professor Julia Rucklidge's research found that micronutrients like vitamins and minerals could make a positive contribution in the treatment of psychological symptoms among individuals exposed to a major stressor.

This indicated there might be fairly inexpensive treatment options for people undergoing psychological and financial hardships characteristic of a post-disaster situation.

Other research conducted by University of Canterbury's Employee Resilience Research group showed the physical and mental states of disaster survivors were the result of both work and non-work factors, and suggested the need for comprehensive support strategies.

"Throughout the recovery process, even if the need for tangible goods decreases, sustained psychosocial support from families, organised community groups, trained professionals and the workplace is critical to developing resilience and facilitating recovery," researcher Joana Kuntz said.

"For businesses, this means they have much to gain from thinking long-term about support plans for their staff following a major disaster, and from expanding the scope of workplace diagnoses to include information about workers' home life."

The Canterbury researchers will share and discuss their research with colleagues and practitioners and the Paris conference from July 8 to 13.

- APNZ