A documentary that explores the role of cricket in helping sports-mad Cantabrians recover after the devastating earthquakes premiered in Christchurch last night, just three weeks before the rebuilding city hosts the opening match of the ICC Cricket World Cup.

Resume Play tells the story of cricket in the Garden City, how it was affected by the quakes, and the controversial development of Hagley Oval into a world-class ground that will next month host the opening match of the world cup.

Produced by Canterbury Cricket with support from the Government, it features interviews from club cricketers, city leaders, "backyard cricketer" Prime Minister John Key and many of New Zealand's leading players, including Sir Richard Hadlee, Stephen Fleming and Tom Latham.

"Christchurch is the most cricket-loving region in the country, obviously. We love our cricket," says a cream-clad club cricketer at the 52-minute movie's outset.

It goes on to tell the history of the sport, which was played within a year of the first four ships arriving from Britain.

Lancaster Park, New Zealand's first test venue, was the scene of many famous cricket moments, including Sir Richard's record-breaking 400th test wicket, Nathan Astle's brutal double century, and Brendon McCullum scooping the world's fastest bowler over his head for six.

The historic ground was wiped out by the February 22, 2011 quake which claimed 185 lives.

After the quakes, the city was unable to host international sport, and was forced to relinquish 2011 Rugby World Cup games.

The film tells of the role cricket played in communities coming together after the disasters, and helping children cope with the aftermath. It also portrays Canterbury Cricket's desire to bring cricket back to Hagley Park, where the sound of willow on leather has been heard since the mid-19th century. The move proved controversial and went ahead only after a drawn-out Environment Court battle.

The redeveloped Hagley Oval, a boutique ground with grass banks and the low-lying Hadlee Pavilion, hosted the Boxing Day test between New Zealand and Sri Lanka last year and was deemed a resounding success by the public and players.

Rebuild bosses say that although 70 per cent of the city's CBD buildings were wrecked in the quakes, about 25 per cent of the regeneration has already been completed.

Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel says in the film that the World Cup will showcase a city open for business.

"The eyes of the world are going to just lock on the most beautiful, picturesque oval that you could possibly imagine for cricket and I know that cricket fans from all over the world are going to say to themselves, I wish I'd come. I just know that the city is going to come alive," she said.

Resume Play will be used by ESPN Star Sports - broadcast partner for the world cup - during its coverage, which has a potential global audience of 2.5 billion viewers. NZME.

- NZME.