By Kelly Gregor

Kathmandu will open a new store in earthquake ravaged Christchurch after losing its shop on Cashel St two weeks ago.

The new store, on 29 Main North Rd, Papanui, was not planned and was in direct response to the destruction of its central Christchurch store, Kathmandu chief financial office Mark Todd said.

Todd said that the company would "love" to reopen its Cashel St store but it was too soon to say whether that would happen. Kathmandu has not been allowed inside the cordon to assess the damage to the building.

The Main North Rd store would be medium-sized and sell a full range of items, including the full Base Camp camping range. It would be located near the Northland Shopping Centre.

Kathmandu managing director Peter Halkett said the store would start trading very quickly. He said a deal gave access to the site almost immediately.

"Despite the current difficulties Christchurch is experiencing, Kathmandu is absolutely committed to Christchurch, and we are confident in the resilience of the people including our own team to get as much of the city up and running as is possible in the weeks ahead.

"We intend to transfer some of our existing Christchurch staff, whose employment has been affected by the earthquake damage, to fit out and open the new store."

Kathmandu's Tower Junction store reopened the Friday following the quake and has been selling emergency related items such as portable toilets and showers.

Last week Halkett said delivery to the company's other 97 stores across New Zealand and Australia would not be affected by the quake. Kathmandu's head office and distribution centre are based in Heathcote, at the base of the Port Hills, which was close to the quake's epicentre. However, those buildings are still operational.

Halkett said Kathmandu has insurance cover for such an event that included loss of profit from the impact on overall trade, increased cost of working and claims recovery.

The company still planned to release half-year results next Thursday. Kathmandu shares yesterday closed down 4c at $2.01.

- NZ Herald