By Paloma Migone of NZPA

Prime Minister John Key says an ``enormous recovery job'' lies ahead and the Government is working on a financial package for those affected by the Christchurch earthquake.

Mr Key today reallocated some ministerial portfolios to free up Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee to focus on the fallout from Tuesday's destructive Christchurch quake.

``I've decided that the scale of the earthquake which hit on Tuesday and the enormous recovery job we have ahead of us means that the Government needs a minister dedicated to solely working on it,'' he said.

Government agencies would work closely with Mr Brownlee as would Civil Defence Minister John Carter and national defence director John Hamilton. He had appointed Maurice Williamson as associate minister to assist Mr Brownlee.

Simon Power would take over as Acting Leader of the House, David Carter Acting Minster of Economic Development, and Hekia Parata Acting Minister of Energy and Resources all ministerial roles held by Mr Brownlee.

Mr Key said the Government was still working on financial help for those affected by the earthquake with Csbinet discussing the issue on Monday.

He said the package would be different from the one created after the September earthquake as central Christchurch could be out of action for a ``considerable period of time''.

``My sense of the economic support that the Government would need to provide, is that it needs to be broader, slightly different nature to last time.

``It may incorporate some characteristics, but I don't think on its own it will be sufficient for the length of time (businesses) will be operating outside of the CBD.''

The Government financial assistance package in September, included a $350 per week gross wage subsidy for businesses with fewer than 20 employees.

Mr Key said he had preliminary discussions with Canterbury Chamber of Commerce chief executive Peter Townsend, and would have a teleconference with 40 chief executives this afternoon to exchange ideas.

He said businesses, including Government departments such as ACC, may have to work together, including sharing office space.

He expected the number of damaged homes to be far greater than the 3000 damaged in the September earthquake.

Mr Key said eight schools had suffered infrastructure damage.

``If we can't restore water and sewage to those schools, then those schools can't operate,'' he said.

Water and sewage remained an area of focus, and has proved to be a challenge, he said.

``Water filtration plants have been sent down from Auckland.

They will be able to provide...1.5 million litres of water within the next few days, and I think 2 million by the early part of next week.''

``Ultimately if we can't restore water fast enough then that poses a health risk for the community. At the moment we haven't heard any reports of concern.''

Mr Key thanked countries who have offered assistance.

``I would like to pay special acknowledgement to Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard for her announcement of an $A5 million donation to help with the recovery,'' he said.

``Leaders from around the world have responded generously with offers of help and support and encouragement.''

As for affects of the earthquake on the May Budget, Mr Key said the issues New Zealand faced earlier this week were as relevant today -- the Government was focused on saving and being more productive.

``Whether it will have an impact on whether we return to surplus a year earlier than we thought, those issues we are working through,'' he said.



<inline type="photogallery" id="7977" align="outside" embed="no" />

- Hawkes Bay Today