A newly-approved plan will enable the Crown to make offers for vacant, insured commercial and uninsured properties in the Christchurch Red Zone.

The new offers would match the 2007/08 rateable land value for all three property categories.

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) said the details were outlined in the Residential Red Zone Offer Recovery Plan, which was now available for viewing.

"Through the Recovery Plan process, all of the issues and public feedback have been carefully considered, and the final plan has been approved with new Crown offers," Cera acting chief executive John Ombler said.

"The offers proposed to this point had included a lesser offer for uninsured properties - this was taking into account things like the cost that may fall on taxpayers in future disasters."

But he said there was "overwhelming feedback" that offers to owners of uninsured property owners should be the same as that for vacant and insured commercial property owners.

"The next step is making the offers to the eligible property owners, and we expect to be able to start this process within the next two weeks," Mr Ombler said.

"For those owners in these categories who accepted an earlier Crown offer, they will be eligible for a top-up to bring it in line with the new offer."

Cera said the potential total cost of the new offers, assuming all eligible property owners accept the offer or top-up, was $58.6 million.

"We have also reached a decision through the Recovery Plan process to reopen the original Crown offer to insured red zone property owners who did not accept the offer last time around, but now wish to accept it," Mr Ombler said.

Any property owner possibly eligible for a Crown offer or top-up who did not have up-to-date contact details held by Cera was encouraged to call Cera on 0800 7464 2372 or email info@cera.govt.nz.

The Residential Red Zone Offer Recovery Plan can be viewed at the Cera website and hard copies would be made available at Christchurch City Council and Waimakariri District Council libraries and service centres, as well as Cera offices.

- NZME.