By Sonya Bateson



With reconstruction work in Christchurch on the horizon, Ngati Whakaue are training up their youth to do their part.

The iwi launched their new trade training initiative on August 3. Their rangatahi (youths) will spend a year working towards an apprenticeship by doing a pre-trade carpentry course and practical work.

Te Taumata o Ngati Whakaue Iho Ake manager Roana Bennett said the training scheme was about the iwi's desire to support its people into sustainable, meaningful employment.

"When we were doing the strategy, everyone kept saying bring back the Maori trade training. We started developing a project around the trades, then the Christchurch earthquake struck. Although it was a disaster, we hit on the realisation that they were going to need lots of tradesmen - in particular, builders."

Ms Bennett said the iwi then told the Tertiary Education Commission they needed funding for their plans to train their rangatahi as carpenters to help with the rebuild.

"They awarded us 150 places for this education year and another 150 places for next year. We're looking at 300 going into 40 weeks of pre-trade training then into apprenticeships in Christchurch."

The idea was once the rangatahi had finished their training, Ms Bennett said Ngati Whakaue would take a group of 35 to 40 to Christchurch.

"We're friendly with Ngai Tahu, we will provide the rangatahi with accommodation and whanau support and the industry and different building contractors will take them on as apprentices. Because we're going down as an iwi, everything goes through Ngai Tahu."

Previous Maori trade-training graduates still in the industry were fully behind Ngati Whakaue's move and Ms Bennett said they were willing to employ Ngati Whakaue rangatahi in their businesses.

"Whakatohea, Tuwharetoa, Tuhoe, Ngai Te Rangi, Ngati Ranginui, Tapueka and Tainui will send rangatahi as well."

A delegation of 10 people from the trade training centre returned last week after a successful trip to Christchurch.

Ngati Whakaue kaumatua Mr Mitai Rolleston said the networks tapped into during the visit would support the employment of the 300 trainees they expected to go through the scheme over the next two to three years.

"The size of the task in Christchurch is phenomenal. Over 5000 carpenters will be required over the next five to 10 years. It's good to think that our youngsters will be part of the rebuilding effort."

- Rotorua Daily Post