The father of a woman killed in the 2011 Christchurch earthquake has backed the winning Canterbury Earthquake Memorial design which will be etched with the names of all 185 victims.

The winning design, by Slovenian architect Grega Vezjak, is a 150m marble wall that will be built on the banks of the Avon River.

The memorial wall, which also features a dedication to the emergency services, will make for a "beautiful and fitting" Canterbury Earthquake Memorial, Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said.

"I think it will be a stunning tribute to the victims of Canterbury's earthquakes, those who suffered through the quakes, and the courage of those who participated in the rescue and recovery operations," he said.

"People will be able to follow the wall and take in the memories and acknowledgments of what occurred, and then cross a new pedestrian bridge to a beautiful gathering space where they can take time to reflect."

Slovenia has a long history of earthquakes, Mr Brownlee said, and Mr Vezjak has empathy for those affected by the Christchurch quakes.

Funding of up to $10 million from the government, and $1 million from the Christchurch Earthquake Mayoral Relief Fund, will be used for the development of the memorial located on the south bank of the Avon River between Montreal St and Rhododendron Island.

More than 330 design ideas were submitted from around the world. The winning design came after feedback from bereaved families, those injured in the quakes, first responders and other stakeholders and the wider public.

Tim Elms, whose daughter Teresa died in the CTV building's collapse, welcomed the design.

He along with about 30 other bereaved family members was given a sneak preview of the design last night.

"There was general acceptance," he said.

"I think it'll work quite well. With the public area for reflection in a place where you can sit and look across at it, it will be quite nice. I'm sure that will be a space that we will utilise."

The memorial was initially planned to be completed in time for the 2016 anniversary.

However, the whole project will now not be done until 2017.

Mr Elms is not perturbed by the delay.

"It's a big job and we want to get it right."

- NZME.