Authorities 'ignored' most Maori post-quake SHELLEY ROBINSON

Relevant offers

Earthquake recovery authorities have ignored 70 per cent of Maori, fuelling a political divide and prolonging earthquake trauma, researchers say.

Lincoln and Otago University researchers and Te Waipounamu District Maori Council (TWDMC) say that despite 70 per cent of Maori in Canterbury being Nga Maatawaka/Nga Taura Here (non-Ngai Tahu), central and local government consult only with Ngai Tahu and leave the other Maori out in the cold.

In the 2013 Census, 41,910 Cantabrians identified as being Maori.

Lincoln University lecturer Simon Lambert said many lived in the city's damaged eastern suburbs and an "alarming pattern" was emerging of Maori suffering some of the worse effects of quakes - stress, damaged or poor quality housing and loss of income.

In his 2013 thesis on indigenous participation in recovery planning, Otago University researcher Hauauru Rae said iwi-only consultation had divided Maori in Christchurch

"As a result, there remains a political divide between Maori groups, matawaka and tangata whenua, and their capacity to express needs and aspirations in the recovery," he said.

Non-Ngai Tahu interests in the recovery were considered to be of "lesser-significance", Rae said.

Lambert said the Treaty of Waitangi required all Maori be consulted in the recovery, not just Ngai Tahu.

TWDMC chairwoman and researcher Melanie Mark-Shadbolt said rebuild authorities were simply "ticking the Maori box" in recovery consultation, leaving many Maori without a voice.

The rebuild is governed by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act, which states its Maori statutory partner is Ngai Tahu.

"As mana whenua [the local tribal authority], it is right that Ngai Tahu are consulted with and are at the top of the list but it doesn't excuse the fact other Maori have been excluded," Mark-Shadbolt said.

"To me, that is not consultation and not what is required in the Treaty [of Waitangi]."

Mark-Shadbolt said agencies were guilty of "iwi-isation" in the recovery.

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority's (Cera) Iwi Maori Recovery Programme being led by Ngai Tahu was an example of this, she said.

"We see it in health sector and the education sector where the Crown only consults with iwi. Why do you only consult with iwi when there are other Maori out there?"

Lambert said advancing earthquake housing issues would be more effective if maatawaka/taura in Canterbury were formally recognised.

"Maori are about the collective. Ngai Tahu are taken care of but the rest have to fight for their rights," he said.

A Cera spokesman said the Crown's position was that the Iwi Maori Recovery Programme, while led by Ngai Tahu, was set up to take all Maori voices into account.

Environment Canterbury said it had asked maatawaka how they would like to be included. The decision was for Ngai Tahu to represent all Maori.

Christchurch City Council chief executive Karleen Edwards said more priority should be spent on Maori relationships at council. "For this reason, Treaty relationships and partnership with Maori have been moved into the Office of the Chief Executive to give it the attention it deserves," she said.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee, Te Runanga o Ngai Tahu and Cera did not respond to requests for comment.

- The Press

Comments