Big projects halted to fund Christchurch earthquake rebuild VERNON SMALL

Big-ticket spending on roads and other major projects nationwide will be delayed or diverted to the rebuilding of Christchurch as the Government looks for ways to pay its share of the estimated $20 billion bill for the quake-ravaged city.

Finance Minister Bill English yesterday pledged to make it a priority to rebuild essential infrastructure such as roads, water and sewerage systems in Canterbury.

He would also take on "a bit more debt in the short term" to help pay for the work.

Mr English said supporting and rebuilding Christchurch would be the most important thing the Government did this year and into the future. "We won't be cutting corners."

Prime Minister John Key said he did not favour an extra levy "unless I have to", because it would further slow the economy. But he could not categorically rule it out, and Treasury was looking at the option.

However, raising the $60 Earthquake Commission levy on house insurance to $120 or $180 a year seems certain, to rebuild EQC's depleted reserves, which stood at just over $6b before the Christchurch earthquakes.

Measures to deal with the disaster and its costs are expected to dominate the May 19 Budget as Treasury reworks its forecasts.

Its interim estimates put the total cost of the latest jolt at between $10b and $15b – on top of $5b for the September 4 quake.

EQC cover is expected to pay for about $4b, with another $5b coming from its global reinsurance. A further $5b will be paid by private insurance.

That leaves the Government to find about $5b over several years.

Mr English warned that beyond the direct cost of the damage, the quakes would also hit economic growth in the first six months of the year and cut tax revenue.

"The earthquake has clearly dealt a considerable human and economic blow to Canterbury, and this will have a significant impact on the Government's finances and the wider New Zealand economy.

"Its effects will be felt for some years to come. But I'm confident New Zealand will come through this. Certainly, the Government will provide the financial resources needed in both the short and longer term."

Christchurch makes up about 10 per cent of the country's economy, and the rest of Canterbury about 5 per cent.

Mr Key said the earthquakes were five to eight times more significant to the New Zealand economy than Hurricane Katrina was to the United States.

ANZ chief economist Cameron Bagrie had conservatively assumed the quake would slice 0.5 per cent off growth in the three months to March, though he said 1 per cent "seems more intuitive".

Meanwhile, speculation is mounting that the Reserve Bank could cut the official cash rate by up to 50 basis points at its March 10 review to boost growth.