Burwood resource recovery 'damn impressive' Clean-up operation 'damn impressive'

A city left in ruins is now being recycled out Burwood way. JOHN McCRONE reports on the mammoth job ahead.

Hidden among the bike tracks and horse trails of Christchurch's Bottle Lake forest is Area B, a fenced off compound with an eight-storey mountain of demolition rubble waiting to be shredded and sorted by the "Recovernator".

Immediately following the February 22 earthquake it was realised that Christchurch faced a huge clean-up task in dealing with all its broken buildings safely, efficiently and greenly.

There were likely to be some 1500 commercial buildings and 10,000 homes to be disposed of. Potentially 1.5 million tonnes of assorted waste. Very quickly, someone had to come up with a sensible plan.

Graunching and shuddering in a billowing cloud of dust, running 16 hours a day, six days a week, since it opened in May, the Recovernator turns out to be it. Although as a project, it has had its rocky moments.

Gareth James, South Island general manager of Transpacific Waste Management, is not surprised that Burwood Resource Recovery Park (BRRP), to give it its official name, has been a relatively untold part of the earthquake recovery.

Waste disposal is never a glamorous business, he says. But from an expert's point of view, the BRRP operation is damn impressive.

Transpacific is the Australian conglomerate that runs Christchurch City Council's waste contracts. In a nutshell, Canterbury used to have 52 dumps scattered around the region, including Christchurch's old Burwood landfill, tucked among the pines and sand dunes of Bottle Lake.

In 1996 it was decided the dumps did not meet modern environmental standards and so a joint venture, Transwaste, was formed between Transpacific and six Canterbury councils to create a single dump at Kate Valley in Waipara.

James says after the earthquakes, it was obvious that Kate Valley was not the place to send demolition material. It hardly made sense to cart 40,000 truck- loads of rubble up State Highway 1 only to fill up an expensive facility, designed for household refuse and industrial waste, a decade or two ahead of schedule.

Also, early on the decision was made to recycle as much of Christchurch's demolished buildings as possible. "We have a target of recovering 50 per cent of the demolition material," James says.

And so Transpacific was given the job of re-opening the Burwood landfill site and creating a purpose-built facility just to deal with the earthquake leftovers.

James makes no bones that as a business proposition, it was rather a gamble. And indeed, so it has proved, with the councils eventually being forced to step in, turning BRRP into another joint venture like Transwaste so that ratepayers now share the project's financial risks.

James says BRRP is funded as a commercial "user pays" operation. The private demolition firms are charged for each truck-load they bring to the dump.

The risk lies in the back-to-front economics of the facility, he says. It is going to collect most of its money during the few years while the trucks are arriving, but then there will be another three years or more when all that is happening is the Recovernator chomping through the stockpile.

"It's a tricky calculation. We have to be sure of charging enough up front to cover our eventual costs."

James says BRRP is going to make some extra money from recycling the scrap metal pulled out of the building waste - the tin roofs, copper wiring and reinforcing steel. But the brick and concrete offers little profit even if it can be reused.

Then there is the problem of all the wood. Some 30 per cent by weight, and probably half by volume of the demolition material, is timber framing and joinery. The Recovernator is going to build up a hill-sized pile of splintered chunks. The question is what can it be used for?

James says the smart idea - given the wood is already cut and clean, it just has the issue of its chemical treatments - would be to build some kind of co- generation plant out at Burwood. A district heating system to supply the town in some way.

The old Burwood landfill which closed in 2005 was tapped for the leaking methane of its decomposing organic refuse. Pipelines supplied QEII swimming pool with cheap heat and power.

James says Environment Canterbury (ECan) is still looking into the possibilities, but the earthquakes have left the city with enough spare wood to fire a small generator for 20 years.

However, he admits that generally the reality is that the recycling of the demolition waste is more of a choice about good environmental practice than itself a money-making proposition. Certainly, burying the whole lot unsorted in some deep hole - what tends to happen following other big disasters like New Orlean's Hurricane Katrina - would have been the cheaper option.

Anyway, says James, the deal was BRRP was expecting to make most of its money on weighbridge charges, a little extra on the salvage value of the materials. Yet then it became apparent the facility was not going to be handling the volume first projected. This is when the project got wobbly.

"The original intention of civil defence was that there would be a drop and haul policy with everything coming to Burwood. Stuff would be hauled away so the city could recover as fast as possible and the sorting would all be centralised."

But then the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) rather controversially agreed that heavy masonry could be diverted to Lyttelton Port to reclaim up to 10 hectares of Te Awaparahi Bay. "That was a free disposal of predominantly concrete and bricks. The material went straight in the harbour and that took a lot of the weight out of what came here." A handy cost saver for the demolition firms but hardly good news down at Burwood's weighbridge.

Then there was a second blow to the project's finances when Cera - under pressure from insurance companies who believed it would be cheaper - allowed the demolition firms to break down central city office blocks on site.

The buildings were stripped of their scrap metal before work started, columns broken up to remove reinforcing steel, and then rock crushers brought in to reduce the rest to hardfill, conveniently levelling the foundation holes with a building's own remains.

Sensible choices of course, says James. But the disposal strategy had suddenly become three-pronged, the finances of the Burwood operation so uncertain as to demand a rethink.

As a result, first weighbridge charges were bumped up from 90 cents a tonne to $1.20 to allow for the reduced volumes - "That's still half the price of taking it to Kate Valley," James points out.

Then to save costs, consent was granted for the residual unrecyclable waste to be buried at Burwood rather than moved elsewhere. Finally BRRP was made a joint venture with Christchurch and the other councils to spread its long-term risks.

"The model we originally set the site up on had to be completely reconfigured to make it a viable economic proposition - and we're still a long way from being sure it is. We've now got to hope it will end in the black rather than the red," James says candidly.

Time to go out and look at the beast itself - the Recovernator. Wilson dishes out goggles, ear plugs, dust mask, helmet and hi-vis vest. Health and safety first.

Wilson says not to worry about toxic materials floating about in the clouds of dust. Cera has had tight control over the demolition work and so dangers like asbestos are dealt with upfront, long before anything arrives at Burwood.

Asbestos is taken away separately to be handled by specialist facilities at Kate Valley. Plainclothes ECan inspectors tail trucks to make sure there is no fly- tipping going on.

But, says Wilson - picking up a stray lump of concrete from the mud and flinging it back towards the towering stockpile - the site has plenty of trip hazards and heavy machinery to catch the unwary.

We stand in the middle of the Recovernator to try to make sense of its maze of chutes and conveyor belts. In fact its logic turns out to be quite simple once it is explained.

The trucks haul in the material. For the first four or five months after February 22, they arrived at the rate of one a minute. The mountain looming beside us, the eight-storey ziggurat with stepped sides cut by bulldozers, has been building steadily for nearly three years now.

Wilson says the earliest demolitions lie buried right at the bottom and are the ones likely to be "rich in recoverables" - where a whole building in a dangerous condition got grabbed and dragged away, contents included.

Loads are dumped at the start of the Recovernator's conveyor belt and pre- sorted by the operator of an excavator. Sheets of roofing iron or large lumps of concrete are picked out manually. The rest then starts up the belt where it tumbles into a shredder - two rotating drums with knives - that minces the lot into pieces smaller than 25cm.

Sieves come next, allowing anything smaller than 6.5cm to drop down to a second line, creating two waste streams - the unders and overs. The unders, or the fines, get mechanically sorted. They pass under a magnet which picks out ferrous metal fragments. Nails, fastening plates and other scraps start leaping off the line as if plucked up by an invisible hand.

A second stage of the metal sorting - the eddy current drums - then briefly induces a magnetisation in the non- ferrous metals like aluminium so that these too suddenly flick themselves off the line and into a waiting bin. The rest of the fines, mostly now mortar, woodchips and soil, rains from a chute at the end to build in an oatmealy pile.

Meanwhile, the overs, the stuff sized between 6.5cm and 25cm, has the more interesting fate. Wilson explains this is the material both large enough to have salvageable value and to be practical to sort by human hand.

In a covered shed, a team of workers hovers over the conveyor belt, picking off the cardboard, plastic, carpet remnants, Gib board fragments, untreated timber and other recyclables and dropping them down holes into more collection bins.

Wilson says anything can come through. Money, tools. He picks up a battered screwdriver passing by on the belt to prove the point.

Wilson says a house makes about 60 tonnes of rubble and coming in as a single load takes about an hour to go past the sorters. It is a poignant reminder of what has actually happened, he says.

"You can have a whole kid's bedroom going past on the belt. You know you have moved on to a different house when the mix changes from red brick to Summerhill stone."

Following the sorting, the overs go through the same kind of magnet system that whisks away any remaining metals. Then there is a final separation of the wood and masonry as the conveyor belt is run through a muddy bath.

The wood floats and can be scooped off to make one neatly washed pile while the rubble gets raked out to form a pile of clean hardfill in the next bay.

Wilson says this is the fascination for him - all the steps to split things up and spit them out at different points. "It's like watching a kid's marble maze."

The Burwood site handles a few other aspects of the recovery too. In another fenced compound is Area D, the site reserved for ‘‘sensitive’’ earthquake waste – the remains of buildings in which people were killed or maimed.

Wilson drives around the compound with quiet respect. On our left is the CTV building, on our right, the Pyne Gould Guinness building, then in a row of heaps, 26 more buildings.

Each pile looks surprisingly small, especially after seeing the eight-storey mound sitting by the Recovernator. Wilson points to what can only be a couple of truck loads of bricks and rubble. ‘‘That was a hairdresser’s.’’ The one next to it, a fish and chip shop.

Wilson says the buildings have to be preserved because the judicial processes are not yet over. ‘‘Engineers might still need to come back and drill holes or something for evidence.’’

Further on, we come across a zone reserved for the dumping of liquefaction.

The dried silt might eventually be found of some use, James says. Already it has been used to help rebuild cracked banks at the Bromley sewage ponds.

Then there is Area P, the settling ponds, where the sucker trucks pumping the sludge out of Christchurch’s broken sewers come to spill their load. All this developed out of sight among the pines over the past few years.

James says the Recovernator should have levelled its stack by 2017. The machinery will be disassembled, the area covered over and landscaped. The buried rubbish from the earthquakes will make a series of small hills like those from the Burwood landfill. In another decade, they will likely be all covered by mountainbike trails – a landmark only for those with a good memory for local history.

Brightly James adds that Christchurch was fortunate to have such a large reserve of land right on its doorstep. ‘‘It showed foresight on the city fathers’ part.’’

If ever there are more earthquakes, Bottle Lake forest will be right here to use again, James exclaims!

Good grief, I have to say. Yes, it is impressive to learn about this largely hidden recycling site, evidence of how the recovery is being carefully thought through. But future earthquakes? Don’t even mention that possibility, thank you.

- The Press

Comments