Business and tourism chiefs want faster quake rebuild LOIS CAIRNS

Pressure is mounting on authorities to accelerate the rebuild of Christchurch's quake-damaged CBD, with business and tourism leaders warning the economy will suffer unless development is fast-tracked.

The Christchurch City Council has received hundreds of submissions from the public on its draft plan for rebuilding the central city – and many of them express concern at the slowness of the rebuild process.

"The time-frame for the rebuild is incredibly long and the longer it takes, the harder it is going to be," said the City Owners Rebuilding Entity (Core), a collective of nearly 200 property owners who develop, own and manage buildings in the CBD.

"The success of the plan will depend on the council's ability to fast-track development and the business owners' ability to make good of the transitional period."

The council's draft plan for the rebuild of the quake-damaged CBD is costed at around $2 billion and is envisaged to take at least 10 years to implement. It includes projects ranging from a light rail system and new convention centre to an earthquake memorial and new multi-sports complex.

The length of time it will take to rebuild Christchurch has already drawn criticism from the Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce and now others are adding their voices to the mix.

Christchurch and Canterbury Tourism and the Tourism Industry Association, in a joint submission, have urged the council to speed up the rebuilding process, warning Canterbury's $2.7b tourism industry can ill-afford any delays.

"Two-thirds of our hotels are damaged or in the red zone; reinstatement targets keep getting delayed. Most inner city backpackers are destroyed or out of action and Christchurch lacks the quantum of backpacker accommodation needed to stay included on the backpacker bus transport circuit. Many overseas travel sellers are issuing instructions to keep Christchurch out of future itineraries due to the chronic shortage of accommodation and concerns about a lack of visitor services. Trans-Tasman airline capacity into Christchurch is down by 10% and will further deteriorate over the coming summer, based on the fact the inbound market is weak," they pointed out.

More than 95% of major conference and convention business to the city had been lost due to the loss of the Convention Centre and Town Hall and conference planners that worked several years in advance were avoiding Christchurch due to a lack of certainty over reopening dates for major convention facilities and hotels.

"Speed and clarity is of utmost importance to the Christchurch visitor industry given its significant physical and perceptual challenges," the tourism bodies said.

Their submission also asks the council to reconsider the proposed seven-storey height restriction in the CBD so that hotels can be developed in an economically viable way. Core also wants the council to rethink the restriction.

- Sunday Star Times

Comments