C1 Espresso's Gerry Brownlee menu criticised

Kirk Hargreaves/Fairfax NZ Kahu Alexander, 11, dresses a paper doll version of Gerry Brownlee at C1 Espresso.

A Christchurch cafe is facing criticism over its decision to immortalise MP Gerry Brownlee as a nearly-nude paper doll in a new menu.

C1 Espresso's new 24-page magazine-style menu, launched on Wednesday, features the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister as a paper doll.

The "Dress Up Gerry" booklet includes a variety of costumes for customers to cut-out and dress the paper version of Brownlee with, including a Disney princess, an astronaut, an airline pilot and Star Wars villain Darth Vader.

Supplied Supplied Supplied Supplied The artistic impression of Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee offers an array of outfit options, including Darth Vader. The artistic impression of Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee has an array of outfit options, including astronaut. The artistic impression of Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee has an array of outfit options, including bathroom attire and airline pilot. The artistic impression of Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee has an array of outfit options, including Disney princess. 1 of 4 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

The new menu has been criticised as offensive by some though.

Labour earthquake recovery spokeswoman Ruth Dyson said she thought the cafe's actions were "just a step too far".

She did not always agree with Brownlee politically but said "you don't have to like someone or agree with them to respect them".

"You can cross the line between having a bit of fun at someone's expense and harming them."

READ MORE: * OPINION: Gerry Brownlee menus a step too far * Gerry Brownlee is back on the C1 menu * Cafe's Gerry Brownlee menu a hit * Park bench dedication to Gerry Brownlee

Rebuild Christchurch founder Deon Swiggs said C1's menu highlighted a growing frustration with the slow pace of the city's rebuild and while he could see the humour in it, he did not believe "personally attacking someone is the way".

"I don't see eye to eye with the Minister at all . . . but even then it's not the right way to go about it," he said.

More than 1000 people (60 per cent) considered the Brownlee dress-up menu to be "bad taste and offensive" in an unscientific poll on Stuff on Thursday.

Just over 700 people (40 per cent) thought the menu was "just a bit of harmless fun".

C1 Espresso owner Sam Crofskey said he was surprised by the reaction to his cafe's "satirical" magazine.

"It's one page in a 24-page magazine. It also has a page satirising the Prime Minister in it . . . John Key pulling a girl's ponytail – that's the one we thought would get us in trouble."

The Dress Up Gerry page expressed "a frustration and dark humour" that a lot of people were feeling about the city's rebuild and was a way for the cafe's staff to express themselves creatively, he said.

"Satire can be taken too far and it's definition is blurry . . . [but this is] a bit of fun."

The cafe would release a new magazine every two months and the next one would have some more surprises in it, Crofskey said.

Brownlee declined to comment on the new menu.

- Stuff