Call to make a body like the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority permanent MARTA STEEMAN

John Selkirk Gary Dransfield, chief executive of Vero New Zealand.

New Zealand's second largest insurer Vero is calling for a permanent national disaster reconstruction body to manage the rebuilding of communities.

The call comes from Vero New Zealand chief executive Gary Dransfield for a permanent body like the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA) as it moves to wind down its role by April 2016.

Dransfield told the Trans-Tasman Business Circle in Wellington on Thursday that there was an argument for maintaining the capability and expertise CERA had learned alongside the Ministry of Civil Defence, to support local and regional areas struck by natural or other disasters.

Queensland had done that, setting up the Queensland Reconstruction Authority after the floods between November 2010 and April 2011.

That body's mission was to reconnect, rebuild and improve Queensland's communities and economy. Its role had been extended to cover historical and continuing disasters in Queensland. It co-ordinated and managed the Government's programme of infrastructure reconstruction within communities impacted by disasters.

"It is the most significant disaster reconstruction programme in Australia's history," Dransfield said.

"There is merit in considering a permanent role for a body such as CERA within government, to maintain the expertise and capability we have gained and to ensure that in the event of further disasters we have the starting point to immediate action and to scale operations to suit the need," he said.

Overall Vero had received almost $4.8 billion of claims from the Canterbury earthquakes, About 70 per cent of that was 2619 commercial property damage claims with 240 unresolved.

It received 7129 claims for homes with 431 domestic claims unresolved and 174 driveways still to repair.

Minister of Earthquake Recovery Gerry Brownlee said the Government had decided to move what remained of CERA at the expiry of its empowering legislation into the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC) alongside the Ministry of Civil Defence and Emergency Management, also a unit within DPMC, for the reasons Dransfield pointed out.

There was a significant amount of expertise and intellectual property developed over the last five years the government did not want to lose and by placing that in a business unit inside DPMC it would be captured.

"I think the concept though of having a standing organisation of the size of CERA at present, and it is already quite significantly scaled back, is not something that would be reasonable expenditure," Brownlee said.

Melding the civil defence emergency response with an understanding inside DPMC of what happened after a disaster was very important, he said.

"We didn't have any of that last time. We had various cabinet minutes and all sorts of stuff. We were scrambling."

The CERA Act would remain a good reference point and be further developed through the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Act coming into Parliament later this year.