Canterbury earthquake repair survey a 'whitewash'

John Kirk-Anderson/Fairfax NZ Canterbury Claimants group spokesman Cam Preston is urging the Government to carry out an independent review into the region's earthquake repairs.

A review into the quality of Canterbury's earthquake repairs has been called a "whitewash" after the Government allowed insurers to choose which homes could be looked at.

The Government promised to review 100 Canterbury homes that underwent significant earthquake repairs after the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) checked the quality of work at 14 properties earlier this year and found problems at 13 of them.

The Canterbury Claimants group – consisting of more than 250 homeowners – used the Official Information Act in April to ask the Government how the new survey would be carried out and what it hoped to achieve.

A response released by Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee on June 11 revealed the sample of 100 houses was chosen from a pool of 300 properties selected by the Earthquake Commission (EQC), IAG, Southern Response, and Housing New Zealand from a bigger pool of 2300 properties.

To be eligible for the survey, repair work had to have been completed and had to be exempt from requiring a building consent.

Homeowners with open complaints against EQC or issues that were still being remediated by EQR were exempt from the survey.

MBIE then randomly chose half of the pre-selected properties for inspection.

"MBIE was not intending to do a sample of all repaired properties as this would potentially include a significant number of houses that solely had cosmetic repairs," Brownlee said in a statement.

The purpose of the review was to identify whether the work complied with the requirements of the Building Code and the Building Act, he said.

"Whether the repairs meet the contractual requirements in insurance contracts, or under the EQC Act 1993 or under Housing New Zealand's earthquake repair standards, is outside the scope of the review."

Canterbury Claimants spokesman Cam Preston said the group did not have confidence in the results of the survey, which were due to be released in July, and was calling for a "truly" independent review into Canterbury's earthquake repairs.

Allowing insurers to "self select" which homes could be included in the survey was "clearly ridiculous", and homeowners were frustrated that many of their concerns were not being considered.

More than 65,000 homes had received earthquake repairs in Canterbury since 2010, but the four organisations were able to pre-select homes from a total of 2300 of those for the survey.

"We think it's a whitewash. It's tricky wording to hide what we know is a very large problem in Christchurch," Preston said.

"All we're asking for really is the facts."

Brownlee said it was wrong to call the review "selective" as it was a random sample of properties that met MBIE's criteria.

"The results of the survey are due to be released next month. I'm not going to speculate on what might be done in the future ahead of the findings of the MBIE survey," he said.

- Stuff