Canterbury sees international migration gains

Stacy Squires An Emirates Airbus A380 lands in Christchurch.

Canterbury's earthquake rebuild and economic growth is a drawcard for migrants with a net gain of 6,300 for the region in the year to March.

Nationally the migration boom has hit yet another record high, with a gain of 56,300 in the year to March, well up from 31,900 in the March 2014 year.

More people arrived in the past year and far fewer left New Zealand for Australia.

All regions had a net gain of international migrants for the March year.

Christchurch with 6,300, Auckland with 26,000 and the Waikato with 2,200 led the gains. The numbers coming into Christchurch have been particularly strong in the past few quarters, whereas 18 months ago the annual arrival totals were much lower.

Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce skilled migrant business service adviser Lana Hart said the biggest sources of migrants to Christchurch were the Philippines, the United Kingdom, Ireland, India and China in that order.

People would continue to be attracted into the region, particularly as construction in the centre of Christchurch ramped up. "In general they are coming for the opportunities the Canterbury rebuild has afforded."

Some bosses were finding it tough to find skilled workers in specialist areas like roading, piping and drainage and thus sourcing those people from overseas. "Canterbury employers are becoming increasingly reliant on migrant labour, on migrant skills and they're starting to exhaust the local options ...

"It (sourcing migrants) is going so well it is going to continue to happen is what my crystal ball tells me."

There were some areas of difficulty for migrants including working in a cooler climate and increasing required housing. There were four temporary workers accommodation solutions in development as well as continued billeting of some workers by Christchurch families.

Decipher Group director Leanne Crozier said work in her specialised in executive recruitment agency was getting busier as managers continued to flow to Christchurch. Many were coming from United Kingdom and Europe, with Aussies and expat Kiwis returning from Australia also in the mix.

"It's actually allowing our Canterbury businesses to take advantage of skills picked up globally ... I guess the great thing is our economy is booming," Hart said.

The wave of migration may peak at around 60,000 later this year, adding yet more heat to the housing market.

At the same time, strong migration has helped boost consumer spending and kept a lid on wage inflation.

On a national level the previous flood of people to Australia has now slowed to its smallest trickle in more than 20 years.

Many of the new migrants from India and China are students.

Migrant arrivals were up 16 per cent from the March 2014 year, while departures were down 13 per cent, Statistics NZ said.

For the month of March alone, there were 5000 more arrivals than departures, which was in line with an average of 4900 a month since August last year.

Migration has rocketed up in the past two years, but appeared to be levelling off, Statistics NZ said.

Part of the reason for the migration boom is that far fewer people are leaving for Australia, with better job prospects in New Zealand than across the ditch, where the mining downturn has hit the economy hard.

The net loss of 2,300 people to Australia in the March 2015 year was the smallest since the March 1992 year when it was also 2,300.

The biggest net gains of migrants in the March 2015 year were from India (12,100), China (7,700), the United Kingdom (4,900), and the Philippines (4,000).

- Stuff