Canterbury heroes acknowledged with awards

Relevant offers

Seventeen Cantabrians have been awarded Local Heroes medals as part of the 2012 Kiwibank New Zealander of the Year Awards.

The awards recognise New Zealanders who have made outstanding contributions to their communities.

A special medal was made for Guinness, a large irish wolfhound which let children ride on his back through silt-laden streets after the quakes.

The medal recipients are:

Bob Parker, Mayor of Christchurch

Nominated for going above and beyond his role of duty after the earthquakes of 2010 and 2011.

Sam Johnson, Christchurch

The founder and leader of the Student Volunteer Army in Christchurch, Johnson pulled together a volunteer army of thousands of students to help Christchurch people after the September 2010 and February 2011 quakes.

Nick Herbert, Christchurch

Herbert rescued his now-wife Stacey Herbert and five others from The Press building after the February 2011 quake. Before he arrived on the scene, no-one had realised these people were trapped and they may well have not survived.

Morgan Perry, Christchurch

Perry is a founding member of the Student Volunteer Army and serves on the University of Canterbury student executive. He initiated a fundraising campaign after the deaths of two students to raise money to help cover the costs of their rents and set up scholarships in their names. He also raised funds to help victim Jamie Gilbert's family after the February quake.

Katrina Hill, Christchurch

Hill has started youth groups around Christchurch and has trained other youths to continue her work. After the February 2011 quake she worked in a community welfare centre in New Brighton and set up a holiday programme for parents and children.

Deon Swiggs, Christchurch

Swiggs founded Rebuild Christchurch on September 10, 2010. The organisation provides engagement and communication for the city through the Rebuild Christchurch website and service delivery, volunteer co-ordination and service.

Sue Pratt, Christchurch

Mother-of-five Pratt volunteers at Freeville School and in her North New Brighton community. She set up a welfare centre at her home after the quakes.

Tristan Roberts, Kaiapoi

Roberts has volunteered for a combined total of 11 years with the New Zealand Volunteer Fire Service and St John. He runs a joint leadership programme that helps young people.

James Ridpath, Christchurch

Ridpath has been a big part of the New Brighton community since 2005, running after-school and holiday programmes.

Rachel McKenzie, Christchurch

McKenzie has been a Coastguard volunteer for 18 years. She also has been involved in training other volunteers and was National Coastguard Volunteer of the Year in 2010.

Sean Scully, Christchurch

Scully helped arrange the removal of thousands of tonnes of silt from Christchurch's eastern suburbs after the February 2011 quake. He also walked the streets with his irish wolfhound Guinness, giving many children their first dog ride.

Hayden Reveley, Mt Somers.

Reveley has been involved in the Mt Somers Rugby Football Club for almost 30 years, devoting time and effort to rugby and the wider community. He also supervises community probation workers and organises jobs for them to help rehabilitate offenders.

Argene Montgomery-Honger, Christchurch

Montgomery-Honger has developed several projects over the past two years. She also came up with the concept of the Canterbury time capsule project after the September 2010 earthquake.

Karyn Riley, Christchurch

Riley is a parent educator and women's wellbeing specialist, inspirational speaker, writer and mother of two. She provides mentoring programmes designed to support, inspire and empower mothers.

John Hartnell, Christchurch

Hartnell led the Federated Farmers Farmy Army that assisted Christchurch's earthquake recovery.

Arthur Laycock, Timaru

Laycock is out of bed every day before 2am seven days a week to deliver milk to Timaru businesses and community groups. He also completes 57 deliveries to country customers a week and is New Zealand's longest-serving milkman.

Rachel Tomkinson, Timaru

Tomkinson provides support to those suffering from food allergies and skin complaints. She published a recipe book, produced a Better Grocery Shop DVD and opened a store that provides chemical-free products.

- The Press

Comments