Canterbury's construction sector and rebuild is close to peaking

Dean Kozanic Construction in Christchurch central city.

Christchurch's rebuild is near to or around its peak says ASB chief economist Nick Tuffley.

ASB's Cantometer index was designed to summarise activity in Canterbury with the rebuild and has been tracking various economic indictors such as residential consents, building work, employment growth, unemployment, wages, retail sales, tourist numbers, migration and car registrations for three years.

ASB will now end the index because it had remained fairly flat for a few months indicating that growth was flattening and the rebuild was "close to or around its peak" Tuffley said.

The bank had always intended to stop the index once that happened.

While there were signs growth was levelling off, like the easing in the number of building consents, Canterbury's economy and business activity was still very strong compared to what was normal for the region.

He said the region's economy would start to change gradually from being construction-centred to one where other sectors started to play more of a part. The urgent rebuilding phase was over, he said.

The Canterbury economy was highly diversified with strong farming, horticulture, manufacturing and tourism sectors. They would start to show their might a bit more in coming years after being overshadowed by a colossal rise in construction in the past three years.

The construction sector too was changing. The urgent and rapid construction of suburbs on the outskirts of the city was beginning to wane and building activity would slow and be determined by more specific customer needs.

The more complicated repair and replacement jobs were still to come, though, and they would be quite big individually, even if subdivision development slowed and the Earthquake Commission wound down its repair programme.

The amount of construction in Canterbury over the past four years was only about one third of the amount of estimated damage so there was still a lot of work to be done but Cantabrians would not see any further big ramp up in the construction sector than its current size and capacity, he said.

Looking back it had always been a challenge to get a handle on when the peak would occur because so many factors were involved.

"I think what it looks like is we are probably finding the peak is a bit lower and a bit earlier."

But it meant the future pipeline of work would remain for longer.

The cbd rebuild looked like it would be a gradual process and uncertainties remained about when some of the anchor projects would go ahead.

- Stuff.co.nz