Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament $45m four-year revamp

DAVID WALKER/The Press Christchurch's quake-damaged Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament will be revamped to the tune of $45 million over four years.

Christchurch's quake-damaged Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament will be revamped to the tune of $45 million over four years.

The diocese unveiled its plans for the cathedral, which involves saving the nave – the main central part of the church – and sealing off some other parts for potential restoration in the future.

Some areas, including the sanctuary, cannot be saved.

Iain McGregor The Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament was extensively damaged in the Canterbury earthquakes.

The church has been off limits since the February 2011 earthquake. It had a date with a demolition ball as recently as last year until a last ditch salvage plan was hatched. Diocese representatives met with architect Sir Miles Warren, who suggested the focus on preserving the nave.

"We then sort of did a complete backflip," Cathedral management board chairman Lance Ryan said.

"[Warren] said, 'It is worthwhile exploring as long as it's financially viable'. We got outside and thought we should at least give this a crack."

Bishop Barry Jones said the reversal was a welcome one.

"No bishop wants to be faced with the possibility of having to pull down his cathedral.

"I hope that you will realise how happy I am today to have this news to convey to… the people of the church and Christchurch."

The plan is not a guarantee. The diocese will soon apply to the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority for a section 38 notice to start deconstruction and expose the nave. Only then will a close inspection be possible and its fate known.

"We may find that when we get in there that it's not possible to save it," Ryan said.

"[But] at least then we would have given it a complete try."

The nave had been strengthened in the past, Ryan said, and the diocese was confident it was salvageable. New footage from inside the cathedral showed its columns intact, but bad cracking in the walls.

Deconstruction work would cost $1m-$2m, Ryan said. If the nave plan went ahead it would cost about $30m. The entire project had an estimated budget of $45m, he said. Some fundraising would be needed.

"We're going to commit he funds that we've got," Ryan said.

"There'll be a shortfall [but] for an iconic building like this… we've got to do something."

Diocese property and development manager Keith Beal said deconstruction would take about a year and design work would start in the meantime.

"We expect it could be another three years [after that] before we're able to restore [the cathedral] to a position where… it can be used."

The engineering work is being led by Opus.

"The first thing is there needs to be a lot of securing work done before it's safe enough for anyone to work on," senior structural engineer Jamie Lester said.

"We haven't gone into a lot of detail [on the strengthening solution]. Then all the repairs. All of the stone is quite fractured. That needs to be replaced or regrouted."

- Stuff