Cathedral rebuild could cost $50m CHARLIE GATES

Daniel Tobin

Dean Peter Beck and Anglican Bishop Victoria Matthews disscuss interim plans for Christ Church Cathedral.

Christ Church Cathedral leaders could have to find up to $50 million to rebuild their quake-damaged building.

The cathedral will be deconsecrated and partially demolished at the cost of $4m to make it safe, Anglican Bishop Victoria Matthews announced yesterday.

A final decision would be made once the controlled demolition and temporary holding measures were completed.

The move would also allow the recovery of artefacts and heritage items from the badly quake-damaged building.

Matthews said she did not know how much of the cathedral would have to be demolished to make it safe.

Once the cathedral has been stabilised, cathedral leaders will consider four options for the future of the building. One involves the complete demolition and rebuilding, which is not favoured by Matthews and Dean Peter Beck.

The other three options retain between 20 and 70 per cent of the building.

The funding shortfall for the options range from $30m to $50m on top of any insurance claim.

Matthews declined to reveal the value of the insurance coverage, but the building is insured for only 70 per cent of the rebuild cost.

The February 22 earthquake cracked pillars, twisted walls, shattered stained glass, collapsed buttresses, fractured masonry and toppled the tower.

The rose window in the west wall collapsed in the June aftershocks.

The cathedral will never be the same, with Beck confirming that any new building on the site would be a "mixture of old and new".

"We are so aware of the passion that people have for the cathedral as the heart of our city and what it symbolises," he said.

"We will make sure it is only the demolition that we require to make the building safe.

"That gives us time to explore further options about what we will be doing to build a new cathedral.

"It will be a mixture of old and new."

Matthews said there was no appetite to rebuild the cathedral as it was.

"The least desirable option is to bring the whole thing down and put the whole thing up again. No-one wants that. It is not a replica and it doesn't serve heritage," she said.

Demolition work is set to start within three months and has not yet gone out to tender.

Project management firm RCP director Nick Beale said he had "no idea how much we can retain" of the original building.

Cathedral engineers will work with Cera during the next 10 days to establish how much needs to be demolished.

The cathedral will be deconsecrated on November 9.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee stressed the need for a pragmatic approach to the cathedral.

"Everyone knows how important Cathedral Square is to Christchurch. It is part of our identity."

- The Press

Comments