Central city living campaign ignores diversity

A website promoting inner city living in Christchurch has been criticised for being too white.

A government website to promote central Christchurch living has been criticised for using only people of European descent.

The Live Central campaign by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) features real people living or working in the central city.

A reader who contacted The Press called it "outrageous".

Devin and Tara and Chester like family life in the central city.

"Look at how white and middle-class they seem to think the people who will be living in the future Christchurch are. It's really quite offensive how narrow this demographic is," he said.

The campaign attracted similar comment on social media.

A Cera spokeswoman said the people used in the campaign were not models or actors.

Grant and Mandy have a business in New Regent St.

Christchurch City councillor Yani Johanson, who represents the ward that includes the central city, said that was "no excuse".

"That is not what our city is going to look like," he said.

"The central city is a very diverse area. Many different cultures live within the four avenues. That is not reflective of who we have or will have living there."

ENTREPRENEURS: Sally and Sam set up dumpling bar the Pot Sticker in The Colombo.

The council logo was on the Live Central website but councillors were not aware of the campaign, Johanson said.

Cr Jamie Gough, who lived in the central city until recently, took the reader's point but said the promotion deserved credit for avoiding "social engineering". It did not offend him.

"This is just real-life people enjoying living in the central city. Sometimes, real isn't always the most politically correct," Gough said.

Gough knew the campaign organiser. She was English of Indian descent, he said. University of Canterbury Maori and indigenous studies head of school Lynne-Harata Te Aika said the campaign was "not an accurate representation of our city and its changing population".

"If they wanted to do that, better to get a range of real families or ask for different representations."

It looked more like Christchurch of 20 years ago than today, which had a fast-growing Asian population as well as Maori and Pasifika communities, Te Aika said.

The campaign involved the livecentralchch.co.nz website, media advertising, billboards and brochures.

The people featured in the campaign were "not selected on the basis of skin colour or ethnicity", a Cera spokesman said.

"They fitted the requirements of living in the central city and/or are strong and prominent advocates of central city living, and they were willing to be featured in the campaign," he said.

Among the people featured on the Live Central Christchurch website are Devin and Tara, who have returned to the inner city with their son Chester.

They say they've seen Victoria St "take off" and are excited the inner city is getting new bars, restaurants and cafes at a phenomenal rate.

Grant and Mandy, who own a New Regent St business, explain on the website that living centrally means they can walk everywhere.

"We have so much more time because we don't have lawns or gardens to manage and we don't have to commute."

Dumpling addicts Sally and Sam returned to Christchurch to set up the dumpling bar Pot Sticker in The Colombo with a chef from Shanghai. The couple plan to open a second dumpling bar in Poplar Lane.

The website quotes them as delighted them by the number of young people coming into the central city to make their mark.

"It's an amazing time to be here, and to be growing a business here. People want to do well and they want those around them to do well also."

- The Press