Cera official heads to Ngai Tahu JOHN MCCRONE

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority deputy chief executive of strategy planning and policy Diane Turner. Relevant offers

In a move that has raised eyebrows, a top Cera official has had her job disestablished and been seconded to work at Ngai Tahu.

Diane Turner, Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority deputy chief executive of strategy planning and policy - who has often stepped up as Cera chief executive Roger Sutton's number two - is continuing to be paid by Cera as she joins the tribe's operational arm, Te Runanga o Ngai Tahu (Tront), on an 18-month posting, starting on Monday.

Labour MP and mayoral candidate Lianne Dalziel called the change mysterious.

"I heard they've held the going-away party already," she said.

But Sutton said the secondment was simply the latest in an "ongoing series of staff movements between agencies" working on the recovery.

He said Turner's policy work at Cera had come to a natural end and her appointment to Tront was a reflection of the strength of the relationship between Cera and Ngai Tahu, a statutory partner in the recovery process.

"Diane will be responsible for leading the development of options and advice and for supporting the further development of Ngai Tahu's Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Programme, and will contribute to developing its strategic direction."

Turner was recruited to Cera in September 2011 after five years as chief executive of Whakatane District Council.

At the time, Sutton said she had been hand-picked because of her experience with major floods and the Edgecumbe earthquake in the Bay of Plenty.

"She has probably had more experience working on a local body dealing with recovery from a natural disaster than anyone else we could find," Sutton said.

Her secondment, following another high-profile departure with corporate services general manager James Hay also going, has led to speculation that criticism of Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee and the progress of the recovery has played a part in a management shake-up at Cera.

However, Brownlee said change was only to be expected because as Cera finished a stage of the recovery - such as the recent negotiation of the central city anchor project cost-sharing arrangements - its staff needs will also change.

"As some problems become less onerous to deal with, others emerge, so you need to get people on board with the skills to deal with it."

Brownlee said Hay is moving on to a "bigger job" with the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, looking at insurance industry issues for the Government.

He was sure Ngai Tahu would value someone with Turner's knowledge to further its own recovery planning.

- The Press