Cera staff leaving in droves

Kirk Hargreaves Cera has lost 27 staff so far this year and has disestablished seven more.

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) is losing dozens of staff members, prompting fears of a leadership "black hole".

Cera has had 27 fixed-term staff resign ahead of their contract ending in April next year, and shed seven more last week .

The Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) lost 11 employees out of a total of 124 staff.

These included the unit's former director Warwick Isaacs and its general commercial manager, Ben King.

On top of that, Cera "disestablished" 14 positions last week. Six staff were given different roles in the organisation but seven had not yet been redeployed, Cera said.

The organisation has 341 fixed-term staff.

The legislation behind Cera, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act (CER Act) expires in April next year.

A draft transition plan outlining the future of the organisation was due in April this year but the deadline was missed.

READ MORE:

* Roger Sutton and his dramatic downfall

* Cera needs plan for transition

* Sutton to thank staff at farewell function

The organisation is already implementing structural changes while its chief executive prepares a transition plan in consultation with local and central government partners.

Chief executive John Ombler said the draft recovery plan would be publicly notified "in the near future".

Labour's Canterbury earthquake recovery spokeswoman Ruth Dyson said Cera seemed to have "no planning for what's going to happen" and feared the recovery leadership would be left with "a black hole".

Someone needed to "pick up the leadership role because we're still a long way to go with the rebuild", she said.

Dyson was worried the organisation would struggle to find appropriately skilled staff to replace the ones who had left.

"Why would anyone take a short term job in an organisation that has no plan for the future?"

Cera mentioned struggles recruiting "suitably capable and experienced staff" in its last annual report.

However, Ombler said on Friday that Cera "had not found it difficult at all to find skilled staff and replace those who have left".

"We still have strong responses to advertising for most roles, and we see that a lot of people do still want to work for Cera and contribute to the rebuild."

Some roles within the organisation had changed or been disestablished "to best position Cera for its on-going work and the coming transition", he said.

A new department called the change management office was created.

Cera was wrapped as a departmental agency into the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet in February this year

It was set up in 2011, under legislation that also granted special powers to both the authority and the earthquake recovery minister because of the magnitude of the recovery task Christchurch faced.

Those powers expire in April 2016 but Cera will not automatically wind up at that time.

- Stuff