Christchurch earthquake recovery agency settled JOHN HARTEVELT

Relevant offers

The shape, power and identities behind the new agency set up to direct Christchurch's reconstruction will be outlined in the city today.

Prime Minister John Key has also revealed plans to scale back and then terminate special financial support to workers and businesses during the next two months.

"Essentially the message is that we're wanting businesses and employees to use this time now to assess their likely future," Mr Key said yesterday. "This is a period of time that is an interim step as people regroup after the earthquake but also acknowledging that they do need to make plans for their future now."

The earthquake support subsidies for employers and workers would be extended until April 18, but would fall away in fortnightly increments after that.

For employers, the current payment of $500 per week for each fulltime employee would drop back to $375 a week, then down to $250 a week two weeks later. For employees, the job loss cover payment, which has been taken up by 6700 people, would be scrapped and replaced with a top-up payment for those still out of work.

It would be paid out at $50 per week for a single person, $80 for a couple without children and an additional $10 per week for each child, up to a maximum of $110 a week.

Mr Key said that so far, $153 million had been spent on the earthquake support package. The cost under the extended scheme was expected to increase by a further $91m.

He has come under pressure over the appointment of an interim chief executive to lead the new recovery agency.

Customs boss Martyn Dunne had been expected to take the job for about two months, but Mr Key said State Services Commissioner Iain Rennie had decided on someone else.

"There were discussions with Martyn Dunne, we're not denying that and Martyn has been doing some work for us in that area," Mr Key said. "[But] he [Mr Rennie] has determined that it's not going to be Martyn Dunne and it will be another name."

Labour's earthquake recovery spokesman Clayton Cosgrove called the appointment process "a fiasco".

Mr Cosgrove said that he and other MPs had been told by Civil Defence controller Steve Brazier that Mr Dunne would be appointed. Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee had "changed his story at least twice" over the matter, Mr Cosgrove said.

Labour MPs were worried ministers were "set on imposing their own solutions on Canterbury people". But Mr Key said the new structure had been explained to Christchurch City Council and other local groups, who were supportive.

The new authority would pull together all of the resources of central government going into the city and co-ordinate where they went.

Quake memorial service emotional for expats A7

- The Dominion Post