Christchurch housing recovery: too little, too late?

John Kirk-Anderson Trina Nesbitt and her two children were stuck living in a caravan because they could not find an affordable house to rent in post earthquake Canterbury.

For many Cantabrians, the earthquakes opened up an ever-widening financial chasm, separating them from the simple knowledge they had a house to go to at the end of the day.

With growing evidence sky-rocketing rents and house prices are leaving those on the lowest incomes in crisis, the Government has started to acknowledge the issue.

Social Housing Minister Paula Bennett recently said: "Ideally, no family would require transitional or emergency housing, however, that is simply not the reality in post earthquake Christchurch."

Of the estimated 11,500 homes lost in the quakes, about 7000 were from red-zoned areas in the more deprived eastern suburbs.

READ MORE:

* 'I've had enough' - Canterbury caravan mum

* Housing recovery neglects the poor

* Christchurch quake mums sleeping in chairs, dining rooms

* 'I think about suicide everyday' - Christchurch shed couple

The battle to get back what they lost created huge financial stress.

Half of those in the poorest income brackets pay almost half (49 per cent) of their income on accommodation costs, according to the Statistics New Zealand report, "Housing in greater Christchurch after the earthquakes".

International disaster research has shown housing issues increased after disasters "particularly for vulnerable populations such as low-income households, some ethnic minorities, and one parent families", the report said.

In 2013, the Ministry of Building, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) estimated the population facing severe housing deprivation may have increased by between 68 and 113 per cent since the earthquakes.

Average rents increased by 36 per cent from December 2010 to April 2015, with the mean rent now sitting at $408, according to rental bond data.

Rents in Christchurch have increased at a faster rate than anywhere else in New Zealand, the Salvation Army's State of the Nation report of February 2015 found.

House prices have increased by 33 per cent, with an average new home including land costing between $450,000 and $550,000.

Social and health agencies supporting low-income families have repeatedly cited housing affordability, access and suitability as the biggest problem for their clients.

A shortage of affordable housing was compromising the safety of women and children, a spokeswoman for family violence agency Aviva Families said.

"Bonds are hard to raise and rents are still very high, which has meant that some people are continuing to live in far less than ideal circumstances and their choices – including those for safety – are limited because of that."

Families were moving around the city, seeking what ever housing they could find – often with extended family or friends in crowded conditions, independent midwife Aroha Abrahams said.

"Parents are often having to leave a child at one house, because that's where the child's going to school, and move away from that child and do the homeless thing themselves with the younger child that is not at school – because that is less disruptive."

She said young pregnant women accepted whatever they could find, including sub-standard private rental accommodation.

"They don't associate themselves with being deserving of what, from my point of view, is a human right. So they are accepting poor living conditions and if they are getting in to housing they are not advocating to the landlord for that housing to be brought up to a decent standard because they feel so vulnerable and have this bizarre sense of gratefulness."

Senior clinical director of inpatient services at Canterbury District Health Board (CDHB) mental health services Steve Duffy said staff were struggling to find suitable, affordable housing for patients ready to be discharged, while also supporting those presenting with mental health illness caused, in large part, by housing stress.

Before the earthquakes, inner city bed sits could accommodate mostly single men with long term mental health problems, who did not want additional social supports, Duffy said.

"Previously in Christchurch, people who were rough diamonds, you could say, could go to one of those doss houses on the east side of Christchurch with $50 in their hand and pay their first week's rent.

"They would all have a waiting list now."

Other cheap rentals, such as Wigram Lodge, switched over to rebuild accommodation and charging higher rents, Duffy said.

The CDHB now relies on non-government housing providers, with a total of about 150 beds for those needing a range of supported accommodation, including meals, or daily visits from staff.

Every week housing providers and mental health staff play a complicated game of musical beds, trying to match those ready to leave the service with suitable accommodation.

There was always some left over and those people would stay in hospital until the next week, Duffy said.

He said when those in supported accommodation were ready to move on, the private rental market was "not affordable for them".

Those "at the bottom of the heap" often end up back in the service.

"They sort of get stuck at various points in the system which ultimately affects us ... well they get admitted for that because they've lost their accommodation and they turn up at the emergency department on a Friday evening feeling terrible and get admitted to hospital."

Admitting patients was not as much of a problem as discharging them, Duffy said.

"We wouldn't mind admitting them, if we could discharge them easily."

For the majority of mental health patients cared for in the community, housing stress was a big element in their ill-health.

Housing issues ranged from dealing with damaged houses, earthquake repairs, moving to new properties, and the associated stress caused by financial hardship and relationship breakdowns.

Housing security was vital for recovery from mental health illness and for independent living, Duffy said.

****

Despite the evidence of housing need, some say the people who needed the most help post-quake have received the least assistance.

Public health professor Philippa Howden-Chapman and colleagues from the He Kainga Oranga - Housing and Health Research Programme at the University of Otago studied the housing recovery in Canterbury. Their work was published last year in the book, Once in a Lifetime: City-building after Disaster.

They concluded: "There has been little provision of permanent, affordable housing for displaced households, particularly for those in the low-income part of the city."

Housing New Zealand (HNZ) and Christchurch City Council social housing was hit hard in the earthquakes. HNZ lost 330 of its 5771 units, and 440 council units were evacuated because of earthquake damage.

HNZ has committed to repairing 5000 properties and building 700 new homes by the end of 2015. However, the completion date may spill into early 2016.

A spokesman said 3850 had been repaired and the organisation was on track to complete 5000 by October-November 2015.

As at the end of April, 165 new homes had been built and another 438 were contracted or under construction.

Christchurch City Council has committed to return its social housing stock to 2366 units by 2025, which would by down 372 units on their pre-quake number.

A Housing Accord between the council and the government signed in 2013 aimed to have 700 social housing units built.

Councillor Vicki Buck said it was clear more than 700 were needed, and she was hopeful the council's new social housing trust would be able to add more to its portfolio.

An MBIE ministerial briefing paper, obtained under the Official Information Act, on options for emergency housing, Transitional Housing Response in Christchurch, reported a rise in the number of people living in insecure housing in Christchurch from mid 2013 to mid 2014 and warned the following 18 months would be the most critical.

The report predicts housing pressures to continue for at least the following 18 months, "as MBIE estimates the market will not stabilise until 2019".

Staff recommended purchasing two motels for emergency housing at a cost of up to $6.5 million but this work was transferred to the Ministry for Social Development which progressed alternative options.

In February and March this year, the Ministry for Social Development funded two housing providers – ComCare and Vision West – to open emergency accommodation for 10 single people and 20 families.

The accommodation was part of the Ministry's Short Term Housing Response (STHR), targeting people living in tents, cars and caravans, a spokesman for Social Housing Minister Paula Bennett.

The STHR has received 146 referrals, with 38 clients (single people and families) housed to date.

A partnership between the Government and the Canterbury Community Trust offered $31m in grants for community housing providers to build 159 social and affordable houses in Canterbury. To date, 32 of the 159 houses had been completed, with the remainder expected to be built by the end of 2016, the spokesman said.

Bennett pointed to a recent slowdown in average weekly rent rises as evidence the market was stabilising and insisted a $25 benefit increase for families with children would support people doing it tough.

Labour's MP for Christchurch East, Poto Williams, said the apparent plateau of average weekly rent would be meaningless to many in Canterbury.

"You might say rents have stabilised or only increased marginally or they have dropped slightly but in relation to what?

"There's a lot of context that isn't explored when we quote numbers or statistics and I think for many people throughout the Canterbury region housing remains the number one stressor for them and sometimes it's not just about getting in to a house – whether a rental or purchasing one, it's keeping it that's the issue."

With about 45,000 households renting accommodation in Greater Christchurch, Williams said it was important the Tenancy Act was reviewed to provide better representation of tenants.

"Our tenancy rules are not very supportive of tenants. And let's be fair, there's a small percentage of tenants that are terrible and do terrible things to houses but by and large most people just want a roof over their heads."

Williams questioned the pace and scope of the HNZ rebuild programme.

"There have been some real delays which have added some pressure and it means that people have been making some really difficult choices and put themselves in some really risky situations I think."

Tenants Protection Association Christchurch manager Helen Gatonyi said rents were still beyond reach for most of its clients.

"I hear people saying things are evening out – if that's true, why are they setting up emergency housing for those people? I don't know what planet they are on."

While the Government's initiatives were a start, she said they failed to address the underlying problems for tenants.

"Everything is a band aid. It is a flawed way of providing affordable housing."

Gatonyi wanted to see the Government put a cap on rents – a form of market regulation used by most other developed countries.

BY THE NUMBERS:

* Number of people waiting for social housing in Greater Christchurch (Christchurch city, Waimakariri, Selwyn): Housing NZ: 572, Christchurch City Council: 28, Canterbury Earthquake Temporary Accommodation Service: 276.

* Average rent December 2010:$299.60, Average rent May 2015: $408.00, Increase: 36 per cent.

* Average house price before the quakes: around $310,000, average house price now (including land) $450,000 and $550,000.

* Number of people living in temporary dwellings (including caravans, garages, insecure shelters) increased by 50 per cent from 2006 to 2013, compared with a 24 per cent increase in the Auckland region.

* People living in severely crowded conditions increased from 1.4 per cent of households to 1.6 per cent of households. This contrasted with a slight decline, nationally.

- Stuff