Christchurch's Bridge of Remembrance restoration complete

STACY SQUIRES/FAIRFAX NZ The lions, a symbol of the British Empire, have been restored to their vantage point on Christchurch's Bridge of Remembrance now earthquake restoration work has reached a conclusion.

Limestone lions again perch on the side arches of the Bridge of Remembrance, to signify the $6.7 million project to restore the earthquake-damaged war memorial is complete.

Strengthening work that started in May 2013 - a technically challenging task that involved 3D modelling, laser surveying and confined work spaces - has ended and a clean-up is underway by engineering and infrastructure management company Downer Group.

With the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt) involvement also ending, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority assumes control of the bridge as it continues the Avon River Precinct development.

STACY SQUIRES/FAIRFAX NZ The restoration and strengthening of Christchurch's Bridge of Remembrance war memorial is complete

Paving, landscaping and new access ways for the bridge were due to be complete by the end of summer.

Bringing the Triumphal Arch and bridge up to post-earthquake building specifications - it can now sway along with seismic activity - was originally expected to cost $4.47 million.

However, the budget ballooned because unforeseen ground conditions meant more expensive piles were required to be driven 27-metres to a layer of Riccarton gravel.

FAIRFAX NZ Historic picture of the Bridge shows wreath-bearers in the Anzac Day parade.

The piles were only 4m deep when the memorial to honour those who fought in World War I was opened on Anzac Day, 1923.

Insurance and Scirt's horizontal repair programme covered the cost of the repair work, which also included sourcing replacement masonry from the Tasmanian quarry that supplied the original blocks.

The tail sections of the lions were also badly damaged and repaired by local stonemasons.

Scirt executive general manager Ian Campbell was delighted an important historic city landmark had been saved, and confident the bridge and 1500 ton arch would survive the city's next major quake given it had the capacity to withstand a one in 2500-year event.

Christchurch Returned Services' Association president Pete Dawson was also impressed with the restoration programme.

"We're disappointed the bridge and arch won't be available to us for Armistice Day this year (November 11) but we can see the overall concept that's been worked on here is absolutely brilliant.

"For us the key date is Armistice Day, 2018. We're quite happy to sit back and have the thing done properly.

"We're really pleased and proud of our city for doing it properly, making it a far stronger memorial for the guys that marched under it to go to war."

Dawson was particularly happy to see the lions back in place, although symbols of British colonialism were often frowned upon.

"It was the position of New Zealand and the history of New Zealand at that time, and that should be remembered," he said, when asked if the lions were still relevant.

"We shouldn't confuse them with arguments over corporate logos for flags. At that time, that's the way our country thought."

- Stuff