Christchurch quake memorial plans revealed

SUPPLIED SUPPLIED SUPPLIED SUPPLIED SUPPLIED SUPPLIED A meadow with a rounded entranceway and a single tree in the centre in a bowl-like sculpture displaying victims' names. A 'ribbon'™ wall made of remains of destroyed buildings that includes a tribute to first responders and Christchurch's recovery. A 45-metre long table with the names of those who died engraved down the centre and 185 empty chairs. A pier on the Avon River framed by a sheltered promenade on the opposite bank. €˜Call and Response€™: a sonic field of memory including a bridge over the Avon River and embossed concrete walls to concentrate and reflect sound. A circular memorial wall with a '˜veil of tears'™ of water trickling over the etched names of those who died in the quakes. 1 of 6 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

The six designs being considered to commemorate Christchurch's devastating February 2011 earthquake can be revealed.

The Press has obtained images of the shortlisted designs for the memorial. The six finalists were chosen from more than 330 submissions and are still being developed. The public will be asked for feedback before a design is chosen.

The designs are:

- A circular memorial wall with a "veil of tears" of water trickling over the etched names of those who died in the quakes.

- "Call and Response": A sonic field of memory, including a bridge over the Avon River and embossed concrete walls to concentrate and reflect sound.

- A meadow with a rounded entranceway and a single tree in the centre in a bowl-like sculpture displaying victims' names.

- A "ribbon" wall made of remains of destroyed buildings that includes a tribute to first responders and Christchurch's recovery.

- A 45-metre table with the names of those that died engraved down the centre, surrounded by 185 empty chairs.

- A pier on the Avon River framed by a sheltered promenade on the opposite bank.

In October, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) presented the plans to people injured in the earthquake and families of those who died. Their feedback is being considered in the finalised designs.

Amy Cooney, sister of Jaime Gilbert who died in the Iconic Bar on Manchester and Gloucester Sts, liked the circular memorial wall best.

"It just resonated with me because of the 'tears' and I thought the cherry blossom [tree] was a nice touch to honour [the Asian students] that died in the CTV building," she said.

"I thought it encompassed everything."

Maan Alkaisi, whose wife Maysoon Abbas died in the CTV building collapse, preferred the longer wall meandering around the riverbank.

"Just imagine that kind of ribbon-type wall on [one] side of the river," he said.

"If you have seats . . . where you can sit and reflect on the other side of the river, that would be really great."

Ann Brower, who was the only survivor when a building facade fell onto a bus on Colombo St during the quake, said the sonic field design was "spectacular".

"I absolutely love it. It invites the visitor in as a member of the experience. It allows the observer to be more of a participant and it allows us to feel whatever we want to feel."

Christchurch landscape architect Di Lucas was concerned most of the designs favoured heavy stone structures on a river bank, after their fragility was exposed in the quakes.

"The fundamental thing of putting walls along the bank...I don't think that's the right message for our memorial," she said.

That left only the table and chairs option, which Lucas said she initially disliked.

"I actually think the table and chairs would be very good, which surprises me. That's the one that will be a signature.

"I think this is the freshest one even though we've got a transient one at the moment."

The 185 empty white chairs display has been a popular temporary memorial on Madras St since the 2012. Artist Peter Majendie gave his blessing to the idea being used in a permanent design.

The six designs would be presented again to survivors and families early next year, once they had been finalised. They would then be shown to recovery leaders and invited groups, such as first responder organisations, before being displayed in an exhibition.

Michelle Mitchell, of the memorial project steering group, said the public would then be asked for feedback.

"We would urge people to consider that these designs do need to be developed before reaching any conclusions about whether or not they could be turned into a suitable earthquake memorial."

After the feedback, a panel will make a recommendation on its preferred design to a memorial leadership group made up of Christchurch mayor Lianne Dalziel, Associate Earthquake Recovery Minister Nicky Wagner, Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage Maggie Barry and representatives from Ngai Tahu.

The final decision will be made by Wagner.

SERENE AND GREEN

The curved memorial wall includes a 2.2-metre high "veil of tears" - a wall of water trickling over the etched names of the 185 people who died in the earthquakes. Cherry blossom trees commemorate the Japanese, Chinese and other international victims who died.

A large oval wall and mini-amphitheatre could be used for formal gatherings.

The green meadow. A single tree in the centre sits in a bowl- like sculpture filled with water with the names of those who died engraved on its surface. A bridge over the Avon River links to existing pathways. The submission entry reads "Earthquakes are a reminder of the destructive force of nature. However the earth also constitutes the foundations on which we build our lives".

The walls leading into the memorial display stories of the earthquakes. "The memorial is intimately linked to its surroundings", the design entry says. "Existing trees and pathways are integrated in the design. Minimal intervention on the topography creates this meaningful piece of art."

- The Press