Christchurch Civic Earthquake Memorial Service

KIRK HARGREAVES/The Press Fourth anniversary of the February 22nd earthquake held in the Christchurch Botanic Gardens.

Hundreds gathered at Christchurch's Botanic Gardens today to remember the city's devastating earthquake four years on.

The magnitude 6.3 earthquake struck at 12.51pm on February 22, 2011, killing 185 people.

Many others were injured and thousands of buildings around the city were destroyed or had to be demolished.

Stacy Squires Kirk Hargreaves Facebook Kirk Hargreaves Nicole Mathewson Facebook Facebook Brenda Avery Marianne Robson Marianne Robson Facebook Facebook Facebook Facebook People pay tribute to those killed in the quake. The crowd at the Civic Memorial Service. A rose released into the Avon river as part of the River of Flowers commemoration. People throwing flowers into the Avon River as part of the River of Flowers. People have gathered at the Civic Memorial Service. Flowers at the River of Flowers site. Map of sites for the River of Flowers commemorations. A floral tribute in Bryndwr. Flowers in New Brighton. Flowers in cones in Ferrymead. Flowers adorn a road cone at Beckenham School. Flowers adorn a road cone at Beckenham School. A road cone tribute on display at CPIT. Bill Banks has installed a road cone tribute in his garden in England. 1 of 14 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

Christchurch's Civic Memorial Service is set to begin at the Botanic Gardens Archery Lawn at 12pm.

The Christchurch City Council-led event is the only civic service to mark the fourth anniversary of the quake today, but other events are being held by private individuals, groups and communities.

"Four years on we stand side by side with those who lost loved ones or whose lives were changed forever, and we look to the future with hope and anticipation," the Council said.

The hour-long public event included one minute's silence at 12.51pm.

Distinguished guests included Christchurch mayor Lianne Dalziel, Christchurch Central MP Nicky Wagner, Selwyn mayor Kelvin Coe, Canterbury police district commander Superintendent Gary Knowles, British High Commissioner Jonathan Sinclair, Ambassador of Japan Nogawa Yasuaki, and Ambassador of the State of Israel Yosef Livne.

A livestream of the ceremony can be viewed online below, while updates will be posted here throughout the event.

&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;nbsp;

12pm:

Hundreds have gathered for Christchurch's Civic Memorial Service to remember the deadly February 2011 earthquake, including some relatives of the 185 people who died, and some who were seriously injured when the magnitude 6.3 tremor struck.

The service, to commemorate the fourth anniversary of the disaster, is opened with a Mihi Whakatau officiated by Ngai Tuahuriri's Charles Crofts, and a rendition of New Zealand's national anthem led by the Woolston Brass Band.

12.10pm

Acting Dean of Christ Church Cathedral Nick Mountfort said the earthquakes left very few around New Zealand "untouched".

The community had gathered to remember those who died, were injured or suffered loss in the disaster.

"[We gather for] all those whose lives were changed utterly in a brief few seconds," he said.

The anniversary was an important time for the community "to remember" and he hoped the memorial service could help "lighten the load" for those who had suffered and who were still suffering.

"We are stronger because we stand together."

12.15pm:

Christchurch mayor Lianne Dalziel acknowledged those who had gathered to remember a lost loved one, those who were injured or those who suffered any form of loss during the earthquake.

"As a city we need to continue to be looking out for each other. Some people will be at the end of their tether where they can't see an end in sight," she said.

Others would be seeing the light at the end of the tunnel, but some "can't move on for a variety of reasons", including insurance issues, questions over what had happened, or the ongoing impact of serious injuries.

Dalziel said she held "such hope and optimism" for the future though, with the rebuilding city holding many possibilities for its people.

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Associate Minister Nicky Wagner said it was "so hard to believe that four years today our world was turned upside down".

"What has struck me ... is how everything has changed ... except for the love and the support and the strength of Cantabrians."

That love gave her hope for the future and she wanted to pay tribute to all Cantabrians and reflect on how far the region had come over the last four years, she said.

"There is a new normal... The things that we do are different. People are more precious, things less so."

Cantabrians were "more creative" and took more pleasure in the small things, like a "smooth road".

"The previous years of hard work, of planning, are coming to fruition."

Wagner also encouraged the public to have their say on the six final designs for the city's earthquake memorial, which were released last week.

A decision on which design would become the city's permanent memorial was expected to be made mid-year, but Wagner said she first looked forward to a "lively debate" from the public about which memorial they wanted.

12.25pm

On behalf of those who were seriously injured in the quake, Ken Hird said he was "honoured" to speak to those gathered about the impacts the quake had had on many people.

Hird, who suffered a broken neck in the quake, said many people were still in recovery, but as each year passed, they saw tremendous progress.

He hoped the rebuild would create an accessible city - one that people with any kind of disability could access and enjoy.

Hird said New Zealanders were fortunate to live in a country where people look after each other in their times of need.

12.30pm:

A series of wreaths are laid by Wagner (on behalf of the New Zealand Government), Dalziel (on behalf of the Christchurch community), and representatives of the Opposition, New Zealand police, St John, Civil Defence, the New Zealand Defence Force, the New Zealand Red Cross, the Salvation Army, the Japanese Government and the international community, and Ngai Tahu (on behalf of the tangata whenua).

Those gathered clap as representatives of police, the Fire Service, St John and other first responders lay their wreaths.

Representatives of the English and Scottish cricket teams also lay wreaths as part of the memorial service.

12.40pm:

The names of all 185 people killed in the earthquake are read out, starting with the citizens of overseas countries.

12.51pm:

Hundreds stand for a minute's silence, four years on from the moment the city's devastating earthquake struck,

At the end of the minute's silence, the Botanic Gardens Peace Bells are tolled four times.

The bells are followed by a performance from Christchurch Senior Sergeant Phil Dean and Hayley Stevenson, of the New Zealand police. The pair perform You Raise Me Up.

12.57pm:

Father Rick Loughnan, Vicar General of the Catholic Diocese of Christchurch, gives a blessing to the city and its people.

1pm:

The 2015 Civic Memorial Service is concluded by Acting Dean Mountfort, who urges people to depart "in peace".

Members of the public are now invited to place floral tributes on the city's temporary memorial, or join the River of Flowers event by placing floral tributes into the Avon River.

- Stuff