Christchurch earthquake: Govt's $6.85m economic recovery package BEN HEATHER AND JOHN HARTEVELT

Daniel Tobin

An angry group of central Christchurch business owners have stormed a cordon to protest the lack of access to their businesses. By Daniel Tobin

The Government has announced a further $6.85m economic recovery package for quake-hit Christchurch.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee and Acting Minister for Economic Development David Carter were today joined by business group leaders in Christchurch to launch the package.

It came ahead of another planned protest by frustrated central Christchurch business owners, who yesterday broke through the central city cordon to highlight their annoyance at delays in being allowed access to their premises a month after the 6.3-magnitude quake.

The package includes money for business recovery coordinators, international visits for exporters to key clients, a trust fund for those in need following the quakes, and more money for workshops and business training.

Brownlee said it had been developed in conjunction with Christchurch business people. The package was about moving from survival to recovery.

Carter said the funding would go towards initiatives that would help restore the confidence of businesses, maintain their liquidity and support ongoing operations.

A one-off donation of $2.5 million had been earmarked for the Canterbury Business Recovery Trust Fund, a new private-sector initiative that would help fund the needs identified by businesses.

To help build international confidence, a $2 million fund to support visits to overseas markets by earthquake-affected export businesses would be made available through New Zealand Trade and Enterprise. It would cover 75 per cent of eligible travel expenses.

A further $650,000 would also be made available for businesses to access training, workshops and business coaching.

Brownlee said while a significant number of Canterbury businesses were fully operational the Government knew it wasn't easy for some to get back on their feet.

"Exporters have expressed concerns about how people outside New Zealand perceive the ongoing effects of the earthquake on business.

"The funding to support visits to international markets will help them meet clients face-to-face, reinforce ongoing relationships and reassure them that Christchurch, and New Zealand, is open for business."

Brownlee also defended Civil Defence against the increasing frustration of business owners who have been prevented from entering the red zone to recovery equipment and records.

While business owners anger was understandable, keeping people alive took precedence, he said.

"I just ask them to consider whether their stock is worth their life."

Chamber chief executive Peter Townsend backed the minister, taking a shot at protesting business owners who stormed the red zone yesterday.

"It's not a time for placard waving, it's a time for working together."

BUSINESS OWNERS UNHAPPY

Joe Arts, who owns a printing company on High Street, told Radio New Zealand this morning that he had no faith in earthquake authorities.

"We've spent $300,000 earthquake-strengthening [the building] and we are shit scared that they are going to pull down our building without our permission. They've made us live in fear for four weeks," he said.

Arts said the Civil Defence website was often out of date, while phone calls and emails were left unanswered.

He had only discovered his building was red-stickered through the media.

"The only way you can get any information out is from journalists taking photographs of our building or contractors saying the building hasn't been damaged."

Civil Defence national controller John Hamilton said he understood business owners were frustrated, but safety was paramount.

"We've had enough of people being injured and hurt by the earthquake itself. I think I have at least a moral obligation to ensure the safety of the rest of the people."

Hamilton said there were enough staff working to restore access for business owners and that people should remain patient.

"We're working all we can to get people through because we want the economy of Christchurch to recover."

Civil Defence Minister John Carter said he understood the frustrations of business owners whose premises had been demolished without them being notified, but he stood by the actions of authorities in the city.

In many cases there was no record of the businesses that occupied badly damaged buildings, only the person who owned the building.

''I think there may be an area there where we might have done more, but having said that, of course, there was a lot of information we didn't have. There is no list, yet, of business people. We do have the owners of buildings, but we don't have the list of business people. We're collecting that now.

''It's the building owner that we notify, because that's the record we had. Now that we've got to the stage beyond the rescue and recovery, we're pausing, so that we can accumulate the knowledge that we need so that we can contact all those people who have an interest.''

Authorities would attempt to contact business owners before any more commercial buildings were demolished, but he could not guarantee that would always be possible.

"There's been occasions where we've been demolishing a building, where the notification's been given, all that stuff. The building comes down, then we find that the building next door suddenly becomes dangerous and we have to take that down immediately as well. There'll be circumstances like that, but we're going to be doing our best to contact and notify people just as we can.''

The Press and Stuff

Comments