Christchurch CBD aerial video shows 'little progress'

CERACHCH/YouTube Christchurch's CBD aerial view August 2015

A new aerial video of central Christchurch shows parts of the city rebuild taking shape, alongside plenty of bare land awaiting development.

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) released the video on Monday to show "the progress at various anchor project sites".

Rebuild Christchurch founder Deon Swiggs said the footage was "a real eye opener as to how bare the central city still is" and "how little has in fact changed" over the past 12 months.

John Kirk-Anderson Cathedral Square from the Novotel Hotel, looking west over convention centre site.

"We cannot deny that there is some private individual progress being made on medium-scale projects but as a whole I think Cera have their heads in cloud cuckoo land if they think it's great progress.

"If you cast your eye aside from the big projects areas, such as the justice and emergency precinct, the retail precinct and the small area in the innovation precinct, there are large swaths of very empty sections which have been like this for some time and there is still no plan to give confidence as to how these areas will regenerate."

The video also highlighted a looming shortage of off-street car parking in the city as many empty sites that would be developed soon were now being used for that purpose, he said.

Cera acting chief executive John Ombler said it was "great to see from this video just how many buildings are out of the ground and progressing".

There was significant development happening on the Avon River precinct, the innovation precinct and the retail precinct, he said.

The Bus Interchange was already open and the footage also showed "huge changes" on the Margaret Mahy Family Playground site.

"There are still gaps to fill in the city but there is a real sense of momentum that the recovery is progressing," Ombler said.

"Every day new buildings are opening and new houses are being completed and this aerial footage definitely shows the extent of that progress."

The video only showed some of the anchor projects. It did not include some major ones such as the convention centre, where construction is yet to start.

READ MORE:

* Christchurch rebuild dream falling behind

* Christchurch anchor project delays cause frustration

* Christchurch's CBD derelict buildings to come back to life



- Stuff