JOHN HARFORD FINANCIAL STRIFE: A cost over-run of $534 million could affect the rebuild of Christchurch's roads and facilities.

The Christchurch City Council is facing a cost over-run of $534 million which could balloon if it fails to secure $1 billion in insurance payouts.

The grim financial picture was revealed this afternoon as the council finally released the findings of an independent audit of its finances conducted by KordaMentha, an advisory firm specialising in insolvencies and corporate recovery.

Mayor Lianne Dalziel said an interim report in December gave her the "heads up" about what the final report would show.

"We're going to have to make some hard decisions about what gets done, what doesn't get done and to what standard things get done."

It was not a question of renegotiating the council's cost-sharing agreement with the Government, she said. There was "some buffer" in the council's budget for the shortfall, but Dalziel could not say what that was.

Responding to a question about whether money for the Christchurch Town Hall rebuild could be used to meet some of the shortfall, Dalziel said that was a "wrong question" because insurance issues were involved.

A "number of issues are going to be back on the table" following the release of today's report, but the council needed to wait until the global insurance settlement was completed.

The previous council had made the decision to rebuild the Town Hall and that had not changed, she said.

The audit was deemed necessary by the new council because the Three Year Plan (TYP) - the budget planning document that was prepared in the middle of last year - was exempted from the normal auditing process under an agreement between the previous council and the Government.

In a 27-page report, KordaMentha concludes the council has a cost over-run of $534m but warns that figure could increase because the amount the council's insurers will pay remains a ''very big financial risk''.

BROWNLEE 'A BIT SURPRISED' WITH REPORT RELEASE

However, Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee cast doubt on the accuracy of the report's figures.

Brownlee told reporters at Parliament this afternoon he was disappointed the council had decided to release the report when he believed not all the relevant information had been received.

The Government and council were partners in a $3 billion-plus cost-sharing agreement to pay for a string of anchor projects as part of the city's rebuild.

Both parties, plus officials from Treasury, Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) and others, had agreed to look at the full costs and report back by the end of this year.

This agreement was reaffirmed at a meeting on April 30 and he was "a bit surprised'' the council had chosen to release its full report today.

Brownlee disputed the council's projected shortfall of more than $500m.

"We are talking about ratepayers stumping up for... I'm frightened there could be money that may not need spending,'' he said.

It was very important the final costs were accurate "and I'm concerned they may not be''.

Brownlee said if he was a Christchurch ratepayer he would expect that the financial information released by the council to be accurate. "As a minister, I have concerns about the accuracy of some of that information.''

There was a "slim possibility'' the final shortfall could be close to the council's projections.

CONCERN OVER ANCHOR PROJECTS

The Three Year Plan assumed the council would get $1 billion from its insurers but so far it has been paid just $356m.

The funding shortfall could mean hundreds of damaged community facilities will not be repaired.

The council was expecting insurance to cover 95 per cent of the cost of repairing its 1000-odd community facilities so only set aside $10m in the TYP for repair work, but to date it has only succeeded in recovering around 45 per cent of repair costs from its insurer. If that continues the council may be $121m short of the $212m needed to repair all the city's damaged community facilities.

Cuts may also have to be made to the horizontal infrastructure rebuild programme as the KordaMentha report now estimates that returning all of the city's broken roads and pipes to their pre-quake stake will cost $3.59b, of which the council is liable for 40 per cent.

If that proves correct the council may need to find another $413m.

It may be able to negotiate for the Crown for some of that money as under the Cost Sharing Agreement (CSA) the Crown has been covering 60 per cent of the cost of repairing the horizontal infrastructure but if that does not happen the council may have to cancel projects, do the work but to a lesser standard, or try to negotiate savings with its contractors.

The KordaMentha report also raises concerns about the council's commitment to the anchor projects, such as the metro sports facility, the performing arts precinct, and the rugby stadium.

Under the CSA it is obligated to contribute $783m to the anchor projects regardless of how much it receives from its insurance. That presents a significant financial risk to the council and a risk to the balance of the rebuild programme if money had to be saved elsewhere so the council could pay for the anchor projects.

''It needs to be recognised that there are very real limits to what can be afforded,'' the report warns.

With the council's ability to borrow further limited, KordaMentha says the council has just five options to address its funding shortfall.

Those options include raising rates, negotiating with the Crown for more money, or getting more money out of council owned assets or investments, either by improving their performance or selling them.

Mayor Lianne Dalziel said given the extraordinary number of variables the previous council faced at the time the TYP was adopted, including the lack of certainty about the actual costs of mending the city's infrastructure and the council's insurance pay out, it was not surprising there was potential for a significant budget shortfall.

"What we now know is that Three Year Plan was based on an overly optimistic view of the future and did not provide enough headroom to allow for cost escalation or indeed for the sort of unexpected expenditure the city now faces as it ramps up land drainage recovery projects."

Finance committee chair Cr Raf Manji said the council would need to take decisive action to put itself on a sound financial footing for the future.

"We have a strong balance sheet to help us weather this kind of financial challenge. KordaMentha makes it clear that there is no single simple solution but rather a number of levers that will need to be used.

"Hard choices will need to be made and we will be relying on the residents of the city to engage with the council as it makes these decisions and charts a prudent and sustainable course forward," Manji said.

LABOUR WANTS 'GENUINE' GOVT INVOLVEMENT

Labour said the report meant Christchurch could now have a "robust debate" about what it could afford and what its priorities were.

The party's earthquake recovery spokeswoman, Ruth Dyson, said it was critical the Government now "comes to the party" and acknowledged the city's financial position had changed.

"We need a genuine partnership between central and local government if our recovery is going to be the best it possibly can be. We need to hear that commitment from John Key now."

Dyson also queried whether Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee's rejection of the report was related to figures included in the Government's next budget, due to be released on May 15.

"If any predicted budget surplus is based on false figures for the real cost of the Canterbury recovery, then people will see through it and expose it for the farce that it is," she said.

Both Labour and the Green Party also called for asset sales to removed as an option for dealing with Christchurch's budget shortfall.

GREENS RENEWS CALL TO RENEGOTIATE COST-SHARING

Green Party Christchurch spokeswoman Eugenie Sage said the KordaMentha report confirmed her party's calls for the Government to renegotiate the cost-sharing agreement with the council.

The Government needed to allow the council to "push back" on some of the big ticket items, such as the $253 million covered stadium.

"Christchurch doesn't need a super-sized stadium, and we certainly don't need it before other, more important projects."

The council and the Government needed to focus on rebuilding basic infrastructure, community facilities, transport and a voluntary buy-out option for those with earthquake-damaged land that was now prone to flooding, she said.

KEY POINTS

- The cost of the fixing the city's broken roads and pipes has been underestimated and is likely to cost $3.59 billion, meaning the council could need to find another $413 million.

- The council has only budgeted $10 million for fixing community facilities because it was assuming insurance would cover 95 per cent of the costs. To date insurance has only covered 45 per cent of the costs, meaning the council could need to find another $121 million.

- Based on those figures the council is facing a cost over-run of $534 million.

- In reality the cost over-run is likely to be much higher because the amount the council's insurers will pay is likely to be lower than the $1 billion estimated and many of the cost estimates are ''works in progress'' so the total estimated cost will change.

- The council has to pay $783 million for the anchor projects regardless of how much it gets from its insurance because that is what it agreed to when it signed the Cost Sharing Agreement with the Crown.

- The council cannot borrow any more money

POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS

- Reduce the rebuild costs - the council needs to consider not doing some of the work planned.

- Negotiate for the Crown to pay more money or for the council to pay less money for the anchor projects.

- Increase the council's core revenue through rate rises.

- Cut spending in other areas such as the capital programme.

- Improve the performance of council owned assets and investments, or sell them.

Source: KordaMentha final report

- The Press

Comments