Christchurch rebuild will be legacy to engineer Canterbury University engineer developed design processes that allow buildings to withstand violent shaking. MIKE CREAN reports.

Engineer Nigel Priestley.

A rebuilt Christchurch will be Nigel Priestley's memorial.

The world leader in earthquake resistant structural engineering died recently from cancer. He was 71. Priestley led investigations into the fatal failures of Christchurch buildings in the February, 2011, quake. His research and development of building systems, at the University of Canterbury and in California and Italy, produced design processes being used in the Christchurch rebuild.

Priestley's standing in international engineering circles is shown in tributes from many sources. Among them is this, from America's Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute, last September: "Once in a while a person comes along who changes the course of an entire industry. In the precast concrete structures world, you are such a person."

Referring to Priestley's major work in California, the institute said: "This research has redefined seismic structural design methods not only for our industry, but for the building industry worldwide . . . Today, many thousands of people all over the world live and work in greater safety from seismic events in structures using this design concept."

Priestley was renowned also for teaching and mentoring students, not surprisingly, as he grew up in a home where books, the arts and learning were valued. He attended Kelburn Primary School, Wellington, apart from two years in Malaya while his father was setting up a technical school there. He left Wellington Technical College at 16 and did his engineering intermediate at Victoria University. He took engineering degrees at Canterbury University.

Holiday jobs on the Benmore dam construction led to a bursary with the Ministry of Works for his PhD studies, which he completed at Canterbury in 1967.

Priestley spent a year in Portugal, then returned to Wellington as head of structures research at the Ministry of Works and Development's Central Laboratories. A decade later he was back at Canterbury University as a senior lecturer, and then reader, in the engineering school. He established a place as one of the "Three Ps", with professors Bob Park and Tom Paulay. The seismic engineering expertise of the Canterbury trio would become highlighted by their contributions to rebuild design, especially after the 1995 Kobe earthquake.

Priestley was appointed professor of structural engineering at the University of California, San Diego, in 1987. By then he had been married respectively to Ruth and Julie and had married Jan in 1982. He kept his Christchurch house and headed to the US with Jan and their children and stepchildren.

In San Diego, Priestley drove the joint US-Japan research programme on seismic design of precast structures. As US co-ordinator of the project he demonstrated and promoted the application of building processes which he had developed. These became used around the world. Victoria and Canterbury universities applied them and they are commonly used in rebuilding Christchurch.

Retiring from university in 2000, Priestley was attracted to Italy by an engineer concerned at building standards there. He co-founded and directed the European School for Advanced Studies in Reduction of Seismic Risk, at Pavia.

Priestley returned to Christchurch in 2008. He undertook consultancy work in structural engineering, specialising in seismic design. He worked on projects around the world for structures such as concrete freeways.

After the Canterbury earthquakes he worked on the design of wharves at Lyttelton and repairing notable buildings in Christchurch.

He was deputy chairman of an expert panel established by the Government to investigate the whole or partial collapse of four large buildings in the quakes.

Priestley's work brought him a string of awards, including appointment as an Officer of the NZ Order of Merit last year.

- The Press