Christchurch traffic revamp within 12 months LOIS CAIRNS

Lichfield St will become two-way and Tuam St one-way within 12 months under plans for a $72 million overhaul of the city centre's transport network.

The one-way street swap is among the first tranche of transport changes the city council and the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) are proposing to make ahead of the scheduled opening of the city's new bus interchange in April next year.

By that deadline they also want to:

- Make over Colombo St, between Hereford and St Asaph St, so that it has better facilities for pedestrians who will be moving to and from the interchange.

- Slow traffic down in the inner city core to 30kmh.

- Other priority projects include improvements to Manchester St, Hagley Ave, Cambridge and Durham Sts.

In all, $72m is expected to be spent on delivering the first phase of the Accessible City chapter of the Christchurch Central Recovery Plan.

Under the cost-sharing agreement the council and the Crown will each contribute $27m, while the remaining $18m is expected to come from the New Zealand Transport Agency (NZTA).

Tomorrow the council's earthquake recovery committee-of-the-whole will be asked to sign off on the first tranche of transport projects so staff can begin consulting the community about the concept designs.

A report prepared for that meeting by senior transport planner Tim Cheesebrough said the projects that would be first off the block were chosen because they critically integrated with anchor projects and the wider recovery plan.

"The new bus interchange is due to open to the public in April 2015.

"To facilitate the operation of the interchange, Tuam St will need to be fully converted to a one-way eastbound main distributor street between hospital corner and Madras St by that date," Cheesebrough said.

"Additionally Lichfield St will be converted to a two-way local distributor street, with a priority on Metro bus operations between the interchange's northern Lichfield St access and Manchester St.

"Colombo St, which acts as a key walking and cycling route and bus passenger access point to the new bus interchange will be subject to streetscape enhancements, especially in the vicinity of the interchange."

Cheesebrough said after consultation with Cera and Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) staff, it had also been decided that work should begin as soon as possible on introducing the slow speed zone in the inner city.

Its arrival would reduce the cost of temporary traffic management speed reductions that were needed on a case-by-case basis around development sites and road works.

- The Press

Comments