Christchurch homeowner feels justified by court's decision

A Supreme Court ruling has vindicated a Christchurch man's decision to hold out for a better deal from his insurer.

Graham, who asked The Press not to use his full name, said he had lived in his Burwood house all his life and paid for a full replacement policy with Tower Insurance.

The house was one of the first to be red-zoned after the earthquakes. He took the Government offer for the land and went to Tower for the cost of replacing his house.

Although negotiations are continuing, he said he was initially offered the rateable value of the property. At one stage, Tower offered to buy him a comparable property but it could not find one with the double garage and workshop he had on his red-zoned property.

"I just gave up on that option," the metal fabricator said.

The judgment by the full bench of the Supreme Court last week found Tower's full replacement policy did not give it the right to choose the option of buying the insurer another house and, if another house option was pursued, the only restriction in price was the cost of "rebuilding the insured home on its present site".

Tower and Graham are still arguing about what it would cost to rebuild his home on its present site but the Supreme Court has given him a much stronger base.

He said his experts had arrived at replacement figure about twice that estimated by Tower.

Tower's earthquake recovery manager David Ashe said no earthquake claims had been settled using the option of buying another house and "the company does not expect the ruling to have a material impact on Tower's future settlement payments".

Christchurch insurance advocate Bryan Staples said some Christchurch property owners had accepted settlements below their entitlements, particularly ones in red zone or TC3 properties.

"For people who have not settled, it will provide some welcome Christmas news," he said.

"For those who have not settled with their insurers, this opens the way for people to get full replacement payments to build or buy new homes up to the value of rebuilding their damaged homes."

This was particularly relevant for homes on TC3 or red-zone land, where building costs were significantly higher than on good ground, Staples said.

Graham said he would net more than the value of his property before the earthquakes but that was what he paid premiums for.

"I haven't been difficult but [Tower] kept changing the rules. The stress nearly finished me."

The Supreme Court said Tower's ability to opt for arranging rebuilding, replacement or repair addressed moral hazard (profiting from the policy) concerns.

- The Press