Christchurch City Council staff face major restructuring

FAIRFAX NZ Christchurch City Council chief executive Karleen Edwards.

Christchurch City Council staff face major restructuring as chief executive Karleen Edwards readies the organisation to take back control of the city.

Edwards said in a statement she was proposing wide-ranging changes to the organisation's structure so that it was ready to regain leadership of the city when the transition from the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) was completed.

"Since I took on this job a year ago, I have spent a lot of time with teams across the organisation, looking at the ways they work and how we interact with our residents. I've also been out and about a lot, talking with residents, communities, businesses, customers and stakeholders.

"I do not believe that with our current structure and ways of working we will get to the point that we need to, and where the people of Christchurch need us to be, without some significant changes," Edwards said.

The city council needed to do better for the city and its residents and to do so it needed the right structure and the right ways of working.

"The proposed structure will create a more agile organisation, where the left hand knows what the right hand is doing and can respond quickly and confidently to the dynamic needs of the rebuild. We are creating a council that will listen to the needs of the community and is able to respond directly to issues as they arise," Edwards said.

The proposed change would not impact council services, she said. While the scope of the restructure included all management and support functions, it did not include frontline staff and council controlled organisations, including Vbase.

Edwards said she recognised the council had undergone recent change but in her view the changes made to date needed building on.

"Our community and our staff are telling us we can do better and we must respond to this," she said..

A change proposal was being prepared and would be released to staff next month.

- Stuff