READER REPORT: Christchurch earthquake: From red zone to dream home JIMMY BANKS

SILT CITY: Avondale was hit hard by liquefaction during the 2011 quakes.

To commemorate the four-year anniversary of Christchurch's deadly earthquake, we asked readers to share their experiences of the day, and life since.

We were one of the many residents whose homes were red-zoned.

I want to tell you about it because the majority of the stories that have come out from the quake have been tales of hardship, but ours is about making smart decisions and making the best of a bad situation.

People will say we were lucky but the only thing we had going for us, was that we were at a stage in life were all we had to do was think about ourselves.

Our 100sqm house in Avondale got through the September quake with only minor cosmetic damage. Driving to work on the Tuesday morning I remember thinking how Avondale was a nice place to live down by the river and was a well-kept secret. It is well documented what happened next to the suburb and trust me we went through it all.

After the zoning announcement we were given two options - take the Government valuation and run, or take the insurance pay out and rebuild a new home.

READ MORE:

* Chch quake: A long walk home

* Chch quake: The terror began on Sept 4

As it turns out our little weatherboard house was extremely well-built and was not classified as a total loss, hence the only real option was to take the GV offer and look to buy existing.

At the time, this left a pretty sour taste in our mouth as we would talk to our friends and neighbours who were classed as rebuilds and would listen to the value and options they had available to them. We would say to ourselves "why are we out of pocket because our house was built strong and did not totally break apart?"

We did however consider ourselves lucky to have at least one option when so many others had none.

Our weekends were spent driving around Canterbury with the massive crowds of newly cashed-up buyers to the real estate market.

At every house, after fighting to get through the door we were greeted by a real-estate agent who looked like they had won the lottery, we put in several offers on different properties to have them all declined. We spent three months doing this and were at the end of our tether.

Then one day a house was listed in Mt Pleasant and at $150,000 below GV we could afford to live in a suburb we could only dream of living in pre-quake but, the house was, for lack of a better word ... smashed.

It had not been lived in for almost a year, the Oamaru Stone had fallen off and been replaced with plywood, every wall, in every room, had cracks you could stick a finger into, the glass shower had exploded and the kitchen cabinetry had fallen off the wall.

But we saw the potential that lay within. A quick phone call to the agent and we found ourselves making an offer on a house that was in worse condition than the one we were abandoning!

With friends and family calling us crazy we moved in a month and a half later after reconnecting the water supply and re-attaching the kitchen cabinetry to the walls. What followed was a two-year uphill battle with the EQC and the insurance company, but we bought the problem so we were willing to fight the fight to have it fixed to live in our dream location. After going through the opt-out process we moved back in to a beautifully renovated home.

During this highly stressful time we had a child, and quickly discovered the multi-level house on the hill with its steep landscaping and retaining walls was no place for a toddler learning to walk. We made the hard decision to put our dream house on the market and after seven long weeks we sold. With the money we made on it we have moved to West Melton to a brand new house we could never of afforded before the quake and we love it.

People will think I am arrogant for telling my story but it's just something that happened with this mad quake city.

Comments