Christchurch east frame renaming 'a waste of resources'

Supplied An artist's impression of the East Frame to be built in central Christchurch.

A plan to rename a major residential development in central Christchurch has been labelled "disappointing" and "a waste of resources".

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) has set up a "working group" to come up with a new name for east frame project, which is intended to condense the city's commercial core and provide housing for more than 1500 residents.

The group includes city councillor Paul Lonsdale, Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) acting director Don Miskell and University of Canterbury Associate Professor Rawiri Te Maire Tau.

Labour earthquake recovery spokeswoman Ruth Dyson said the initiative was a "waste of time and resources".

"People in the city will roll their eyes. It beggars belief that Cera thinks it's a priority to rename the east frame when there is so much uncertainty around the blueprint and real issues facing our residents and city.

"Cera might as well have done a public survey."

Being part of a working group to rename the frame was not the "best use of [the participants] skills", she said.

Former Christchurch mayor Garry Moore agreed.

He said it was disappointing "three blokes" had been chosen to come up with a new name.

"They're all nice fellows. I know and like them well but I'm saying to them: 'how are you going to find these ideas? Who are you going to talk to?'"

Lonsdale and Tau were not available to comment on Tuesday.

CCDU deputy director project delivery Greg Wilson said the east frame's prominence in the city's rebuild warranted the investment in a new name.

"We think it's worthwhile to invest a tiny proportion of the overall project budget into the naming and how the design reflects the history and stories of this area.

"The public will be given plenty of opportunity to have a say."

The group would develop options for names for the neighbourhood and the park and road in the area. Cera would run community engagement once they were chosen.

The developer for the east frame project is yet to be announced.

Reliable sources said Fletcher would be the builder of some 1200 apartments along Manchester St in the frame.

The CCDU has been buying up land in the area since the recovery blueprint was released in 2012. Several sites have been compulsorily acquired.

- Stuff