Christchurch earthquake bill under fire in House JOHN HARTEVELT AND GILES BROWN

The Government is again raising questions about the future of earthquake-hit Christchurch suburbs as it rushes recovery legislation through Parliament.

Parliamentary select committee hearings on the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Bill started in Wellington last night after the post-quake political accord shattered and the Greens voted against the bill's first reading.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee told Parliament that an effective recovery would be impossible under existing laws.

The bill, which is expected to pass into law tomorrow, would give the new Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) the power it needed to "facilitate and direct" recovery work, he said.

"These powers, I think, will be exercised sparingly, but they will be particularly important for the recovery of suburbs as well as for the CBD," Brownlee said.

The bill includes specific powers for Cera to get information from any source, to requisition and build on land and to carry out demolitions. Brownlee said the powers to get information were especially important.

"Gathering information for a large data set that will help make informed decisions about the future viability of some streets, and indeed some suburbs, in Christchurch is absolutely essential," he said.

"This information must be able to be shared to ensure appropriate levels of consultation and explanation for the decisions made."

Brownlee said Cera would have the power "to obtain or require information from any source, including the commissioning of reports". Some of it would be commercially sensitive, but before disseminating data, Cera would have to consider privacy principles.

Notice would have to be provided to people with an interest in the land when Cera took land or built on it.

There would be compensation for people whose land was forcibly taken, and Brownlee would also give quarterly reports to Parliament on Cera's operations.

Only the Green Party and independent MPs Hone Harawira and Chris Carter voted against the first reading of the bill yesterday, but all Labour's Canterbury MPs criticised it.

Labour earthquake recovery spokesman Clayton Cosgrove said he would suggest a series of amendments.

"Mr Brownlee is the earthquake tsar. He holds the pen over the [Cera] chief executive and all he or she does," he said.

Green Party MP Kennedy Graham said the bill gave too much power to Brownlee.

"The powers granted are excessive, the extent of public involvement is inadequate and our constitutional principles are violated," he said.

Select committee hearings were set down to continue in Christchurch today.

THEY SAY

"Only those powers considered necessary have been provided for." – Ilam MP and Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee

"Let's be under no illusion – this authority will have enormous power, and if that power is exercised appropriately and correctly, that is all for the good." – Waimakariri MP and Labour earthquake recovery spokesman Clayton Cosgrove

"By focus, the Government seems to mean that power will be concentrated enormously in one person." – Green Party MP Kennedy Graham

"We simply did not have the capability to deal with a disaster of this magnitude." – Te Tai Tonga MP Rahui Katene

"For some reason, there is a view that public participation is in conflict with rapid decision-making." – Wigram MP Jim Anderton

Council angry at short notice

The Christchurch City Council was given just a day's notice that a parliamentary select committee on the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Bill will meet in the city today.

The committee will meet at the Addington Events Centre from 10am to 2pm.

Mayor Bob Parker and Cr Yani Johanson said they found out about the meeting yesterday.

Johanson said it was "outrageous" that he was told at such short notice – by a community board member who had heard the news in a media report.

"I am just shocked that they didn't tell the councillors, and we haven't been invited."

Councillors had not been given a draft of the bill.

"It's a real concern if this is the respect they are going to show the council and the community, by doing things in secret and not being upfront and open," he said. "It doesn't bode well for the future."

People were usually given adequate notice to make submissions to select committees, Johanson said.

"There's been no public input requested for this bill," he said. "It's pretty unusual for a select committee to give just a day's notice."

Parker said he heard about the meeting yesterday afternoon.

The council would decide this morning whether he or another representative should attend, he said.

"Speed is of the essence here. The most important thing is that we get this [legislation] in place so we can move on."

The city council had made written submissions asking for clarification on its role in relation to the bill, Parker said.

- The Press