Christchurch earthquake legal advice sought SAM SACHDEVA

Quake-hit Christchurch residents are contemplating legal action against their insurers as concerns grow over the companies' stances on cover for red-zone properties.

On Saturday, The Press reported that some insurance companies had told red-zone residents they would not cover the replacement cost of a house if it was repairable, even if they had full replacement cover.

The Government has given homeowners in the red zone areas two options: they can accept an offer of purchase for the entire property at its 2007 rating value, or accept an offer for the land only and deal with their insurers about their house.

Last week's Government land report placed 5100 homes within the red zone, areas of the city deemed not feasible to rebuild on.

Christchurch lawyer Grant Cameron, who represented the families of those who died in the 1995 Cave Creek disaster, said he had been approached by a group of residents who were "disenchanted" with their insurance companies and the Government package.

He would meet the residents today to discuss their concerns and determine a course of action.

He could not go into the specifics of any case until he met them, but said a group action against insurance companies was one option.

"People can find it very difficult to move ahead with their case without having a group behind them."

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said insurance companies had been "quite clear about their position" during several months of discussions with the Government.

The potential problems around insurance policies were partially responsible for the Government's offer to purchase red-zone residents' homes and land, as well as their land alone, Brownlee said. "There is no doubt that this is an extremely difficult situation, but we have tried to give people as clear a picture as is possible."

Brownlee also rebuffed concerns about the Government's decision to use 2007 rateable values to determine property values, as expressed by former mayoral candidate and real estate agent Brad Maxwell.

Maxwell said he had expressed concerns about the valuations system before the Christchurch earthquakes, as there could be "hundreds of thousands of dollars" between market values and ratings valuations.

Bexley residents in Pacific Park could find themselves out of pocket at least $50,000 if they accepted the Government's offer, he said.

"If a real estate agent forced a seller to sell their property at below market value as opposed to government value, then they'd be hauled ... in front of the Real Estate Agents Authority."

Maxwell said new developments in Prestons and Highfield could have an average section price of $200,000 by the time they were ready for the market, making them unaffordable for some red-zone residents.

Residents would find it "almost impossible" to purchase new sections to build on, and would be forced to either move to an undesirable area or buy an existing home which was older than their previous house.

Maxwell said the Government could have used monthly sales records from the Real Estate Institute of New Zealand to determine the property values.

Brownlee said there had been a nationwide decline in property prices since 2007, meaning some homeowners would benefit from the offer.

The Government had looked at a number of options for determining the property value, and the 2007 ratings valuations were the best method, he said.

COUNCIL HAS DAYS TO RE-INSURE

Christchurch City Council has just four days to find new insurance cover.

The council's insurance coverage is provided by Civic Assurance, which administers pooled local body insurance cover through the New Zealand Local Authority Protection Programme Disaster Fund. The council's policy expires at the end of June.

Radio New Zealand reported that councils, other than Christchurch and Waimakariri District Council, should be able to get cover, but at higher premiums.

Christchurch City Council considered the issue at a meeting in early June after a report by corporate finance manager Diane Brandish warned there was "no firm assurance" it could find insured when its existing policy lapsed. The key stumbling block was the difficulty of insurers securing reinsurance.

At the time staff expected cover would be available for events other than earthquakes. However, Brandish said the premium for any new policy could be up to 400 per cent higher than the council had paid in the past and the excess would be significantly higher.

If insurance was not available, she said the council would have to self-insure and rely on "the strength of our balance sheet and support of central government".

Corporate services manager Paul Anderson said other councils and companies were experiencing similar insurance problems.

This morning Waimakariri district mayor David Ayers told Morning Report that unless the Government could help out the council, it would be a serious problem .

"The Waimakariri council has prudently insured what it could insure and if we can't get insurance on our assets, that's a real threat to our ratepayers and for our earthquake recovery."

Ayers said his council only became aware there was a problem shortly after the big aftershocks on June 13.

- The Press