Christchurch's new $29 rebuild tour ANNA TURNER

Daniel Tobin

The Press was invited on the first Red Bus rebuild tour, which has replaced the red zone tour.

OPINION: Red Bus have launched a new 'rebuild tour' through Christchurch's CBD. But is there enough left to see and is the tour worth its $29 price tag? Reporter Anna Turner took a ride to find out.

We're at that awkward stage of the rebuild. There's not that much rubble and there's not that much rebuilt.

So, when I was assigned to take a ride on a new "Christchurch Rebuild Tour", I had a few questions.

Would there be anything to look at? Would it be entertaining? Or would we just be staring at empty lots trying to imagine what would be built there?

I climb aboard a Red Bus to find out.

Our tour guide for the afternoon is Donna and, with a view on "looking to the future rather than the past", she gives us just a brief overview of the events of the Canterbury earthquakes before we head off up Gloucester St.

Donna quickly proves herself to be a font of knowledge.

She knows what's coming up, what's going down and what's filling the gap in the meantime.

As we drive along, screens in the bus show photographs of what she is talking about, such as concept plans for future development.

At first, it's a bit odd becoming a tourist in the city I live in, but Donna manages to show me things I didn't know existed (there's a cathartic sculpture in Kilmore St) and teaches me a fair bit of history.

However, it's not a dreary lecture. Donna is exactly the right mix of informative and chatty.

She'll show you her favourite place to get a pizza - CBD Bar, in case you're interested - and even mixes a bit of light comedy in with her talk - "Christchurch, not short on carparks" - for good measure.

In 90 minutes, it's a pretty good summary of what we've been through over the last three years.

Two Kaiapoi women are pleased with their experience.

"It was very emotional being from here but very informative," Judy Anderson comments. "I'm going to tell all my friends to go on it."

But at $29 per person the tour is not exactly cheap.

Red Bus chief executive Paul McNoe believes the price is fair, considering the commentary and multi-media included.

"You get the whole experience, rather than just walking blindly around," he said.

"We're mainly aiming it for tourists, although residents should like it as well, and for a tourist attraction that is a completely acceptable price."

Canterbury Museum director Anthony Wright says the tours are designed to "help visitors learn about where we've come from and give them an insight into what lies ahead".

I think it will do just that.

- The Press

Comments