Christchurch's convention centre 'highly unlikely' to be built by 2018

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee answered questions about Christchurch's anchor projects at a parliamentary committee meeting on Thursday.

Christchurch's convention centre is "highly unlikely" to be built by 2018 and the metro sports facility site has asbestos issues.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee answered questions about Christchurch's anchor projects at Parliament's financial and expenditure committee on Thursday.

When asked whether the convention centre would be ready in time for a large health conference booked in November 2018, Brownlee said it was "highly unlikely".

"It's surprising to me that they actually booked it," he said.

The Government delayed completion of the facility from 2017 to the end of 2018 earlier this year but it now appears the new timeline might be unrealistic.

Brownlee said plans for the facility should be reconsidered in light of the Christchurch City Council's recent decision to save the Town Hall.

"I want to get to a point where we're confident we're not doing the wrong thing," he told the committee.

Plans for the convention centre had been made "in an environment that wasn't anticipating the Town Hall to be surviving".

He pointed out it took eight months for the city council to make a decision on the Town Hall, which delayed convention centre decisions.

Ownership of the convention centre would be decided "quite some time in the future" and Brownlee would not rule out private ownership.

Brownlee appeared confused about a potential budget blowout for the facility and was not sure whether the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) had asked cabinet for additional money on top of the $284 million promised by the Government for the project.

He said $77m had been spent so far acquiring land for the project.

Brownlee answered questions on the metro sport facility – the completion date has been delayed to early 2020.

Ongoing analysis of the ground conditions and potential asbestos problems on site were being investigated and had caused delays, he said.

What facilities would be included in the sport complex needed to be reconsidered.

"Certainly the swimming pool is required," he said. He was was unsure whether an indoor netball facility would be required as Netball had recently acquired a large facility in Papanui.

There was also "a desire to include the temporary high performance centre" and "all that create a reconsideration".

Labour Canterbury earthquake recovery spokeswoman Ruth Dyson said a "considerable cloud of doubt" was looming over the convention centre and other anchor projects.

Brownlee's "unsettling presentation" at the committee had raised new questions in terms of projects' funding, ownership and timelines.

- Stuff