Christchurch rebuild: From recovery to 'regeneration'

John Kirk-Anderson Prime Minister John Key and Minister Gerry Brownlee announced a new plan for Christchurch's rebuild last week.

Last week Prime Minister John Key announced major changes for the governance of Canterbury rebuild.

The proposed plan lays out the power structure that will be shared between the Christchurch City Council, the Government and other agencies.

The fine details are still to be decided after a public consultation process, but here is what we know so far:

Kirk Hargreaves Christchurch mayor Lianne Dalziel

What will happen to the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera)?

Cera will cease to exist from April 2016, when the five-year Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act (CER) Act expires.

Some of Cera's functions will be transferred to other ministries or local agencies, and a few will be retained within government.

The Christchurch City Council will progressively take back control of the recovery over the next five years.

The handover will be achieved through the creation of a new entity named Regenerate Christchurch, which will help take over the management of the central city rebuild from Cera's Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU).

READ MORE:

* Council claws back rebuild power

* Christchurch councillors weigh in on anti-Brownlee blog

* Mike Yardley: City Council-led rebuild would be 'cataclysmic'

Will some of Cera's special powers be retained?

The plan says some special powers from the CER Act will still be needed beyond April 2016.

They will be transferred to a new business unit of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.

These include:

- Powers to acquire, hold, mortgage, lease, dispose of, amalgamate, subdivide, improve and develop land on behalf of the Crown. This includes land in the red zones and the central city.

- Power to erect, repair, demolish and remove buildings or structures on both crown land and private land will still be needed post April 2016, the report says, for work including the Port Hills red zones and the central city and residual work on dangerous buildings in the central city on land now owned by the crown.

- Power to create new recovery plans, named regeneration plans under new legislation, as well as to give ongoing statutory force to existing recovery plans.

The draft plan says emergency powers can expire.

These include Brownlee's existing powers to direct councils to take or stop taking any action.

What will be the difference between Cera and the new entity – Regenerate Christchurch?

The main difference is that Cera was 100 per cent government-led, whereas government and council will work together to set up Regenerate Christchurch and its commercial board.

The new entity might incorporate the council's new development entity - Development Christchurch.

At first, Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee will oversee it, but the goal is a "progressive transfer" to the city council.

Regenerate Christchurch's focus will be narrower than Cera's, but similar to the CCDU.

It will manage development within the city's four avenues and delivery of the Crown's major projects and precincts.

Cera had a much broader mandate, which included coordination across the whole of recovery, community wellbeing, supporting the residential rebuild, contribution to the rebuild of horizontal infrastructures, completing demolitions and clearances and managing the residential red zones.

The draft plan says the new entity will "need to deliver both commercial discipline and public value".

It would be a "one stop shop" for investors and developers and would handle the consenting process.

What is the new legislation replacing the CER Act?

Called the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Bill, the new legislation will run from April 2016 for five years, and will formalise the transition of Cera's functions to other government agencies, local councils and Ngai Tahu.

It will be less focused on immediate response, and more focused on long-term regeneration.

It will include "robust consultative processes".

How can I submit on the proposed plan?

The Draft Transition Recovery Plan is online, where you can comment through an online form, or by emailing info@cera.govt.nz. You can also go to Cera's Facebook page.

Feedback is due by 5pm on Thursday, July 30.

- Stuff