Christchurch rebuild agencies rate poorly in infrastructure industry survey

supplied New Zealand Council for Infrastructure Development (NZCID) social infrastructure portfolio manager Sarah Lang

Building firms and their associates have rated Canterbury government agencies poorly on bidding processes for big infrastructure.

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA) and Christchurch City Council (CCC) were among the worst performers in an industry survey.

The two major rebuild bodies were in a "below average" group named at the Building Nations Symposium in Christchurch this week.

The survey presenter, Sarah Lang from the New Zealand Council for Infrastructure (NZCID), said the "real killer" for respondents was agencies failing to lay out detailed plans.

CERA, the city council and district health boards were not giving detailed forward work plans that could help firms to recruit staff, get the gear they needed and plan their workflow, she told Fairfax Media.

These work plans were annual, tri-annual, 10 year and 30 year projections.

The best agencies met their major suppliers every two months to talk about market trends, innovations and upcoming work, Without this information it was difficult and expensive for a company to respond to last-minute calls for contract bids or requests for proposal.

NZCID surveyed members of its 80-strong organisation who were bidding for projects worth more than $10million. It had responses from 32 "senior industry leaders with significant industry experience" in roles like chief executive, director, partner or bid director.

This was the first time NZCID had asked its members about procurement "and came about because of the frustration our members were voicing with the variability in procurement expertise across agencies".

The New Zealand Transport Agency was rated "head and shoulders" the best in the survey, Lang said.

CERA acting chief executive John Ombler said the scale of the disaster and damage in Christchurch had been unprecedented, and consequently the size and number of recovery projects that CERA had needed to procure goods and services was also unique.

Aside from the scale of the work, it had been necessary to accelerate projects "to ensure the recovery processes" and to ensure that the business community and general public remained confident about CERA's commitment to the city.

The agency had remained committed to the highest principles of government procurement, 'including integrity, fairness, transparency and ensuring the best value for the taxpayer's money," Ombler said.

Tendering for Christchurch projects had been tailored to suit "the Christchurch situation and relevant markets," he said.

In some cases, large projects had been offered as single tenders, while others had been broken down to a series of small parcels of work. The parceling was to ensure a "level of competition to get the best possible result."

CERA believed its approach had given opportunities to a variety of different-sized operators, while still ensuring a quality supplier won work.

"I think the quality of the work completed to date shows that we have been on the right track," Ombler said.

CERA was in regular dialogue with the building industry and took on board all feedback about its procurement methods, Ombler said.

CCC chief executive Karleen Edwards attended the NZCID symposium but was not immediately contactable, a CCC spokeswoman said.

Other "below average" performers named in the survey were Auckland Council, Auckland Transport, Wellington Council. Wellington Water, and district health boards. Districts with populations less than 50,000 and the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Justice also made this group.

Above average performers were Department of Corrections, large metro councils above 50,000 and 100,000 people, Ministry of Education, Transpower and Waterfront Auckland.

- Stuff