Christchurch's rocky foundations and cheap fixes

Stacy Squires Underfoot Services' Bevan Craig uncovers hidden damage to a ring foundation.

Christchurch has such crap house foundations, says Aucklander Bevan Craig of Underfoot Services. No, really.



It was using rubble concrete in its ring foundations until the 1960s when the practice ought to have been phased out in the 1920s. And right up to the earthquakes, new homes were being built without reinforcing mesh in their concrete pads because it saved a buck or two. That is the penny-pinching mentality you are up against.



But on the other hand, the insurance companies did cover this nonsense with their no questions, "as new", replacement policies. It was their commercial choice to leave themselves liable for what happened when seismic forces collided with shoddy building practices.



Craig runs a video of one of the hundreds of claims he has been working on, a typical 1930s villa in Linwood. The cement render of the ring foundation makes a hollow sound where he crouches to tap it. "You can tell straight away from the drummy noise that it's shot inside," he says.



Now Craig is flaking off the plaster and poking at what lies behind. Loose rubble that he can pick away in gritty lumps.

"It doesn't matter whether a house is on the flat or on the hill in Christchurch, the power of the earthquakes has gone right through it. Boomf!" says Craig, smacking an exclamatory fist into his palm.

"With a rubble foundation, everything inside then just explodes and shatters. The plaster on the outside is strong enough to stay like an eggshell, but once you get through that eggshell surface, it's all spalled behind."

MDF used to prop up floorboards in bodged earthquake repairs.

Craig, a licenced foundation specialist who was first brought down after the September 2010 earthquake to do some rapid assessment work on behalf of the Earthquake Commission (EQC), has become one of the rebuild's most persistent critics.

His relationship with EQC indeed goes back to its "peacetime" days when he helped on events like the earthquakes in Palmerston North in 2003 and Te Anau in 2004. However he is horrified with the way insurance repairs are being handled in Christchurch.

Craig says everyone knows the game that has developed. Foundations are the big thing for insurers. They are either going to end up costing a little or a hell of a lot.

John Kirk-Anderson MBIE officials at press conference on unconsented repairs. Adrian Regnault (center) and Dr Larry Bellamy (right).

If a claim can be minimised, any deeper damaged dismissed as historic settlement, then perhaps $20,000 might have to be spent lifting a corner or filling the odd crack.

But if full investigations reveal the foundations are in fact shot, an old $400,000 villa may have to get a $800,000 rebuild. Now the insurer has to spend on modern engineered foundations, probably extra to lift the home above the post-quake floodplain – a windfall result where the owner gets back something much better.

So this is the essential tension, says Craig. Two starkly different outcomes depending on which side of the line the insurance decisions fall.

STACY SQUIRES/FAIRFAX NZ Close up of a rubble foundation with loose lumps of stone.

Craig says early on, EQC took control by deciding to scope and project manage its own repairs. EQC became the gateway organisation. And clearly it had a vested interest in keeping down the ultimate cost to the Crown.

To provide balance, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) was then supposed to act as the honest broker. Responsible for building regulation, it was meant to draw up guidelines to standardise the diagnosis of foundation damage and also sponsor trials to validate repair methods such as underfloor grout injection and jacking and packing.

But look what a weak safeguard that has turned out to be. Take this single issue of rubble concrete, says Craig.

Notching the bearer to deal with a lifted foundation pile. Acceptable practice says MBIE.

In 2013, MBIE came out with its Building Code guidelines for assessing Type B perimeter and pile foundations. Its advice to insurers was that if a house looks reasonably level and the cracks to its ring base are no larger than the 5mm tip of a pencil, then it is probably safe to put it down as a cosmetic fix – apply a bit of waterproof filler and a lick of paint. Any bigger cracks could be repaired with injected epoxy resin.

But Craig says that was a standard for modern structural concrete, the kind which acts like a beam and fractures cleanly in one place. However the reality is Christchurch is a city of mostly older homes. "About 65 per cent of the housing stock is pre-1960s."

And the majority of those then have rubble foundations. Their concrete is made with cheap river tailings. Or further back, even old bricks or any kind of building rubbish that might have been tipped into the foundation trench. They also routinely lacked reinforcing wire.



Craig offers a quick concrete tutorial. When it sets, cement forms crystalline strands. But it will break as easy as a biscuit unless there is a suitable aggregate material to send the crystals growing in all directions.

Up north, they use crushed quarry rock. "Quarry rock, which is volcanic and ceramic, breaks up into triangular shapes. When you mix it, it compacts without large voids. So the strands are directed every which way, there's no big pockets of cement in-between, and because the rock surface is rough, the cement can get a good mechanical bond."

Craig says crushing has the added advantage of strength-proving the aggregate. "Any weak bits of rock in there will explode, becoming part of the fines and dropping out. You're only left with stuff you know is strong."

But Craig says Canterbury lacked handy rock quarries. With its braided rivers, it also had tempting heaps of smoothly rounded river stone laying about. So local builders got used to employing this inferior aggregate that offered little grip, packed poorly, and which had never been tested by pressure.

You are beginning to understand the problem, he says – why rubble foundations might simply fall apart inside when a quake shock wave hits them. And by his calculation, there are some 35,000 houses with this kind of foundation in Christchurch.

So MBIE has come out with advice which does not match much of what is to be found in the real world. "You've got 65 per cent of the foundations not featuring in the guidelines at all. That means 65 per cent of the houses in Christchurch have been assessed wrongly. And if repaired, repaired wrongly too," he says angrily.

Craig says there is not much point epoxying a ring foundation crack if there is little strength left in the material surrounding it. Imagine the difference between gluing together a broken plate and gluing together a plate that you have trodden on and crushed. "Well, you wouldn't bother trying, would you?"

★★★

There is nothing new in what Craig says. He and other independent experts have been making the same points for the past few years, in private to MBIE officials and in public at claimant meetings.

But Craig says time has passed. He has now inspected some 250 properties for insurance claims. He also observed some 40 red zone homes as they were being demolished to get a better picture of typical Christchurch building practices. So he feels more confirmed in his facts.

And of course the rebuild has progressed to the point where enough repairs have been done for the quality of the outcomes to be judged.

Just last week it looked like a few of those chickens might be coming home to roost when MBIE finally released a study that confirmed an alarmingly high percentage of perimeter foundation repairs were indeed failing to meet the Building Code.

MBIE inspected a sample of 90 properties out of a pool of around 6000 which have had various kinds of "minor" structural work – repairs carried out without a council consent under exemptions.

The apparent good news was slab foundations gave no cause for concern. Where scopes said that floor cracks could be fixed, or slabs releveled with grout injection, MBIE officials found the results met Building Code standards.

However with traditional ring and pile foundations the story was very different. For 30 out of 50 houses levelled by "jack and pack" methods, the repairs failed to pass muster. Likewise, 20 out of 39 were non-compliant when it came to dealing with the cracks in their perimeters.

MBIE was quick to blame poor workmanship – or cowboy builders. MBIE building performance manager Adrian Regnault pointed to the difficulty of finding good staff. "It's dirty, it's crawling under houses and it appears there is quite a high turnover in the people involved in this work."

MBIE engineering design manager Dr Larry Bellamy agrees such a high failure rate with ring foundations – over half – must be a concern. Yet what was seen were mostly lazy mistakes.

For instance, piles packed with scraps of wood rather than durable plastic spacers. Piles left unsecured by wire. Joists notched to bring a floor level where too much wood had been hacked away. So the repairs were not wrong in principle, just wrong in execution.

The same with the perimeter foundations, Bellamy says. Cracks that had been epoxied on the outside often were not epoxied all the way through. Filler rather than resin had been used in some structural cracks, while others had not been filled when they should have been.

Bellamy says its shows that foundation work – being hidden out of sight – might lead to a temptation to be sloppy. But none of the homes were left in a dangerous state and all the defects could be fixed by a competent builder.

However for MBIE's critics, the study misses the point. It only tells that when patch repairs are done, they are too often not being done very well. The real question is whether foundations are being properly checked in the first place.

Craig says MBIE excluded the many thousands of ring foundations which EQC had put down as merely needing cosmetic treatment under its crack and floor level guidelines. So who knows what inspections would find if building experts actually got under these homes to take a look.

Yet the pressure on MBIE appears to be telling as it admits its next step will be to consider how to extend its current guidelines to deal with the rubble foundation issue.

Regnault says in a month or so, MBIE should be producing a further FAQ covering "weak foundations" as it prefers to call them. "A lot of this is quite novel, so we're learning things all the time," Regnault says.

But Bellamy adds he is not convinced there is the big problem that Craig makes out. The existing system should be producing good practice.

Bellamy says first – as MBIE continually stresses – the guidelines are only intended as advice to insurers on what has to be done to meet the safety and liveability standards of the Building Code. So they only set the minimum that repairs must achieve to be legal. Any discussion over what an insurance policy actually promises is something quite separate.

Then while Craig claims the earthquakes have caused widespread damage to the innards of rubble foundations, how much of that deterioration is in truth historic?

Bellamy says the very fact Christchurch has used weak concrete for a century means the same foundations might have looked just as bad before the quakes if anyone had chipped away the plaster. Yet they still supported the house.

"If it is weak concrete, then it was already weak. And you're not putting any more load on to it when you are jacking and packing to level a floor."

Bellamy says the more reasonable worry for home-owners post-quake is whether the land beneath their foundations will still take the house's weight, especially if it is TC3 property. "It's the bearing pressure on the ground that's the key thing."

And here, he confesses, MBIE is raising questions with EQC about whether enough geotechnical investigation was done on a number of the unconsented repairs in the study. There was a lack of information in the scope documents to explain how the decisions might have been reached. "But that was only a few," Bellamy hastily adds.

Anyway, generally speaking, if shaking has caused real damage to a house's rubble foundations, that will become quite apparent during the attempted repair process, says Bellamy.

"If the repair strategy says to epoxy inject a crack and the epoxy is not going all the way through to the other side, that'll suggest there's something going on inside – the epoxy's disappearing into a hole."

At which point a responsible contractor is going to call for a rethink, go to the next step solution of perhaps cutting out and rebuilding that whole section of a ring foundation. "If they couldn't meet our guidance for full penetration crack repair, then they have to find some other way of fixing that crack. "

So Bellamy says MBIE is continuing to look into the worries that have been raised. But again at the level that MBIE operates – the question of whether a repair methodology meets the minimum requirements of the Building Code – Bellamy says the department is not picking up any great systemic issues.

★★★

Craig scoffs at MBIE's assurances, calling them a snow job. He asks how can the Government be trusted when – as the backer of EQC and Southern Response – it is more exposed than anyone to the insurance costs of the earthquakes.

A completely independent inquiry into the earthquake repair programme, something like a Royal Commission, is now needed to expose the truth of what has been going on.

Craig says he has focused on rubble foundations because they are such a large slice of Christchurch's properties. He doesn't want to scare people, but his view is about a third were sufficiently affected that they ought to be replaced under an "as new" policy.

He would not tick off slab foundations so fast either. Again, easy-going Christchurch has allowed 80mm thick slabs where others insist on a 100mm depth. Reinforcing mesh was left optional. And uncompactable river tailings rather than crushed gravel have been the norm when constructing the underlying foundation beds.

Craig says liquefaction can make this a problem. The sub-base should be free draining, but silt can penetrate unseen all the way through to a slab's damp proof membrane.

"There's a 40 per cent void ratio in the river tailings. The liquefaction can fill that to make a solid matrix. And how many people have you heard saying their house is colder and damper after the earthquakes?"

Mind you, Craig says, cheap repair methods like injecting grout into the sub-base to lift a tilted slab can result in the same thing. That is the difficulty with foundations. When the trouble is out of sight, it encourages short-cuts.

With the cost of doing it right being often prohibitive, houses are being butchered to bring floors level. Do you realise EQC will even grind down a slab's surface to flatten a raised corner, Craig asks?

Craig says the rebuild has got to the stage where there are no longer any illusions. And last week also saw what is likely to be the start of the significant legal challenges.

Lawyer Anthony Harper confirmed it is about to file a group action on behalf of 110 home-owners to tackle EQC's scoping practices and MBIE's guidelines head-on. Litigation partner Peter Woods says the suit will seek a declaratory judgement on what standard of repair the EQC legislation actually stipulates.

Woods says the EQC Act is basically an "as new" promise, however EQC has been relying on the wiggle room of an "…or reasonably sufficient" clause to assess damage to MBIE's minimum building standards.

"It was a cost cutting measure. And it's been very effective. MBIE does say it is only offering guidance. Your entitlement under your policy may be different. But they've really hung the home-owner out to dry as you're an individual voice against the collective might of EQC and the insurer."

Woods says a decision from the High Court is unlikely before next February. Any appeals could then eat up another year. So the city's insurance battle is now set to go into a second round that will stretch out past 2017 and 2018.

Craig rather rolls his eyes at that thought even though it is inevitable. He only expected to be down for a few months and already it has turned into almost five years. He and his wife have moved into a townhouse, but they would quite like to return home.

Yet you are talking of potentially thousands of properties where the repairs were done inadequately, or the damage simply glossed over, never repaired at all. So unfortunately this is a story with a long way to go says Craig with a sigh.

Previous coverage of foundation repair issues:

* Cheap fixes devaluing homes, says Craig

* Are assessors scratching the surface?

* Can we trust insurers on quake repairs?

* Learning to play the game of claims

* Gerry Brownlee targets 'cowboy' builders after EQC foundation review

- The Press