Christchurch earthquake rebuild could boost economy ANDREA VANCE

Rebuilding Christchurch after the earthquake could boost the economy by more than four per cent next year.

Treasury has estimated the combined cost of the shakes that have rocked Canterbury since September 4 could reach $20 billion.

The Government has already spent up to $250 million in the past two weeks trying to get the city back on its feet, Finance Minister Bill English told Parliament yesterday.

But as the reconstruction of houses, businesses and key infrastructure gets under way, this will lift growth and employment, he said.

However, the expected growth in GDP over five years had now dropped by 1 percentage point to 12 per cent, he admitted.

"The size of the disaster will have to be matched by the size of the reconstruction effort. The combination means that next year we are likely to see growth rates lift above four per cent on average across the economy, and that will be positive for employment."

He added: "The effect of the earthquake will come in a couple of phases. In the first instance it will be negative from the point of view of the Government's books and its effect on our fiscal position. But when we look out over the future, we see that the expected rebound will be sizeable."

Forecasts showed total investment spending would lift by over 40 per cent. But his office would not explain what this spending included.

Investment in housing would be up 80 per cent in the same period. An expected skills shortage would boost employment.

Prime Minister John Key said the Government was trying to get the cordon shifted so the Christchurch Polytechnic Institute of Technology could reopen.

"It trains a lot of people in the skills area. I am sure that over the course of a number of years in the future there will be enormous demand for people in the construction sector, and I think those people will find work in Canterbury," he said.

Labour leader Phil Goff said the building and construction industry in Christchurch was downscaling, companies were going into liquidation and apprenticeship numbers were being reduced.

Key said Tertiary Education minister Steven Joyce was "looking at those programmes and projects".

He told Parliament spending on infrastructure could top $20b. However, his office later clarified he meant the total repair costs in line with what Treasury had revealed.

- Stuff