Christchurch quake anniversary: Live updates

David Hallett Chris Skelton Iain McGregor Stacy Squires David Hallett Iain McGregor IAIN McGREGOR/Fairfax NZ IAIN McGREGOR/Fairfax NZ David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett Don Scott David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett John Kirk-Anderson Joseph Johnson David Hallett Chris Skelton John Kirk-Anderson John Kirk-Anderson John Kirk-Anderson John Kirk-Anderson John Kirk-Anderson David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett David Hallett A CITY'S BRAVERY: Mayor Bob Parker accepts a gold medal from the Royal Humane Society on behalf of Christchurch. Russell McCathy embraces his daughter Catlin Rose McCathy, who lost her mother Linda Rosemary Parker in the CTV building. COMFORT: Hundreds gathered in Cashel Mall for two minutes' silence. LYTTELTON REMEMBERS: About 200 people gathered, held hands and hugged on the site of a demolished deli on the corrner of London and Canterbury Streets for two minutes of silence. GOVERNOR GENERAL: Lt General Sir Jerry Mateparae CITY MALL: A memorial service was held in City Mall where many died last February. GATHERED: More than 200 people attended the City Mall memorial service. TAKING A MOMENT: People gather at the memorial service held in City Mall. SUPPORT: Standing together at the Civic Memorial Service. TRIBUTE: A moving song is performed at the Civic Memorial. CIVIC MEMORIAL: Prime Minister John Key addresses the service. AERIAL: Thousands are in Hagley Park for the Civic Memorial Service. STUDENT LEADER: Sam Johnson, centre, speaks at the service. INTRODUCTION: Mayor Bob Parker addresses those gathered in Hagley Park. WELCOME: A Maori ceremony of welcome was led by Henare Rakiiha Tau. RESPECT: Thousands listen to the memorial service speeches. CROWDS ARRIVE: Hundreds are gathering in North Hagley Park for the Civic Memorial Service. TO REMEMBER: A cross is placed on the twisted Medway St footbridge in Dallington. UPLIFTING: Flowers are tied to a fence surrounding the St Faith's Church in New Brighton. LEADERSHIP: Canterbury Earthquake Recovery chief Roger Sutton and Mayor Bob Parker answer media questions ahead of the civic memorial. MAYOR BOB PARKER: Media had a chance to ask questions ahead of the Civic Memorial Service. TO REMEMBER: Nicola Arnott and daughter Molly, 3, tie a message to a "tree of hope". TENSE: Mayumi Asakawa, a former student at CTV's Kings Education language college, prepares to ring the peace bell. PEACE BELL: Mayumi Asakawa, a former Kings Education student rings a bell for those who died in the CTV building. EVER-LASTING: A sculpture of the Christ Church Cathedral features in Christchurch's commemorative garden. PEACE: A commemorative garden, complete with a sculpture and peace bell, has been created in the Christchurch Botanic Gardens. STANDING STRONG: Shoulder to shoulder in Latimer Square. MOVING: The Latimer Square service proved deeply affecting. LATIMER SQUARE: Hundreds gathered for an early morning service. FAMILY SERVICE: Margaret Stocker and her daughter Louise joined the Latimer Square service. Margaret's husband Neil Stocker died in the Methodist Church on Durham Street. COMFORT: People arrive at Latimer Square for an 8am memorial service. SPEAKERS: The Latimer Square service was multi-denominational. HIGH EMOTIONS: Hundreds of people joined the Latimer Square memorial service. RED CROSS: The Latimer service was for emergency services staff as well as families. HEAVY HEART: Mayor Bob Parker says today "is heavy with loss and emotion". MAORI WELCOME: Henare Rakiiha Tau says "our tears are your tears and our grief is your grief". TELLING THE STORY: Media from around the world have come to Christchurch. RESPECTFUL: Hundreds of members of the public join families of quake victims and emergency services staff for the Latimer Square service. LEADERS: Earthquake recovery minister Gerry Brownlee and Mayor Bob Parker await the start of the service. EMERGENCY SERVICES: Ambulance and search and rescue staff in Latimer Square. 0 of 0 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

15.48pm: Mayor Bob Parker ends an "extraordinary day" by closing the awards ceremony.

Parker thanks all those who had remained to support "the wonderful people" who had received awards, and said he had been overcome with emotion at points during the day's services.

"Today has been a most extraordinary day, starting with this morning, when the emotion was so palpable that we wondered how we would get through the day."

Parker wishes the city's residents "all the best in the times ahead".

14.35pm: Christchurch mayor Bob Parker presents bravery medal given to city to the parents of quake victim.

Parker says it recognises the efforts of all the city's residents after the earthquake.

"This is yours."

Parker asks the parents of Joe Pohio, who died in the February earthquake, to hold on to the medal during the bravery award ceremony.

The 40-year-old Christchurch City Council employee was helping an injured woman in a High St food court when an aftershock struck and rubble fell on to his neck, killing him.

Parker says Pohio was known as a man "who loved living life" and had many friends.

14.28pm: Prime Minister John Key pays tribute to all those who helped following the city's earthquakes.

Key says the gold medal award, see entry below, is recognition of the work done by many people in the city.

"In such times of tragedy, New Zealanders really step up.

"Your courage, bravery and sensitivity will never be forgotten."

14.20pm: The Royal Humane Society of New Zealand presents Christchurch mayor Bob Parker with a gold medal to recognise the city's bravery in response to the February 22 quake.

Society president Austin Forbes, QC, says the medal is presented to "commemorate and mark the countless and incredible acts of bravery" following the quake.

Forbes says it is the first time in 44 years that the society has awarded a gold medal.

13.51pm: Acts of heroism to be recognised with 140 Christchurch quake awards to be handed out.

The ceremony was scheduled to get underway at 2pm.

13.32pm: Floral tributes and pictures are laid by the victims' families in front of the stage as the service finishes.

Meanwhile, the New Zealand Army Band plays on.

13.31pm: The official ceremony closes with a prayer for those killed in the quake and for the future.

13.24pm: A group of children release 185 monarch butterflies in memory of those killed.

Meanwhile, the Christchurch Pops Choir sings You Raise Me Up.

13.18pm: Christchurch residents speak from the heart via a video played on the big screen.

They talk about their love for the city and hopes for the future.

The video finishes with two children singing about how Christchurch will be "as good as new".

13.07pm: In a video message Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state, says the strength of Christchurch's residents has shone through.

13.03pm: Governor-General Sir Jerry Mateparae says a year ago the lives of the people of Christchurch and Canterbury changed forever.

"We have gathered to remember all that we have lost. All that has changed."

He says those who died are not forgotten.

"Their names are etched in our memories and on our memorials."

12.58pm: Governor-General Sir Jerry Mateparae reads a message from Prince Charles which talks about the courage, determination and spirit of New Zealanders.

The Prince of Wales, and his wife Camilla, the Duchess of Cornwall, will visit New Zealand in November to mark the Queen's Diamond Jubilee.

12.54pm: Two minutes' silence is followed by a prayer in memory of those lost.

12.51pm: The nation stops for two minutes' silence to remember the quake's victims.

12.38pm: As the quake victims' names are read out, family members lock arms with their heads bowed.

The crowd is silent.

12.33pm: The names of the 185 people killed in the Christchurch quake are read out.

The crowd stand.

12.28pm: A group of young people read a collection of prayers for those lost in the quake.

"From all corners of the world, with all our creeds, with all our similarities and differences, we remember them."

12.24pm: Prime Minister John Key takes the stage to read from the bible.

His reading is followed by prayers.

12.22pm: How Great Thou Art is sung, with the family members of those who died all rising to their feet.

The crowd follow.

12.16pm: Mayor Bob Parker says there has been a resurgence of strength and spirit with the community learning a new way to do things.

"No city has ever been more strongly united."

12.15pm: Mayor Bob Parker says if people work together there is nothing that can't be done.

12.14pm: Mayor Bob Parker says so much goodwill has been directed to the people of Canterbury.

12.12pm: Mayor Bob Parker says lives have changed in ways people could not contemplate.

He thanks the people of Canterbury for standing together.

"This is a year like no other we have ever experienced."

Of the victims' families he said: "This day above all days must be a heavy, hard day for you. There must be pain, there must be many thoughts that cannot really understand or share, but we are all here with you and for you today."

12.11pm: Mayor Bob Parker extends his heartfelt welcome to the families and friends of those killed.

12.07pm: The crowd stands to join an emotional rendition of the national anthem.

12.01pm: The New Zealand flag is flying at half-mast as the Christchurch quake memorial service opens with a Maori welcome.

Families and friends of those who died are seated in a separate area.

11:59: A couple of thousand people have now arrived for the start of the quake memorial service.

Some people are wearing red and black in support of Canterbury.

Ad Feedback

Christchurch mayor Bob Parker also arrives at the service.

11.53am: Hundreds of people have started gathering for the Christchurch quake memorial in Hagley Park.

11.25am: Christchurch Mayor Bob Parker says he is a "bucket of emotion" today.

"We can't escape the pressure and the deep personal connection."

Parker, at a media conference, recalled one of his "most poignant" memories for Japanese media.

He told them about watching Japanese urban search and rescue workers marching down the street to the CTV building and how, when they found a body, they would form a prayer circle.

He recalled seeing them blackened from the building, with ripped overalls and covered in dust marching "with great dignity" back to their camp.

"We remember their courage and the loss of those beautiful young souls from Japan."



Parker said the city had made "extraordinary" progress in the past year considering the "massive scale" of damage.

He was optimistic about the next 12 months, as there was an exciting opportunity to build a city which reflected the needs and values of the 21st century.

10.45am: Peace bell is rung by former CTV-based student to remember her lost classmates.

Mayumi Asakawa, who attended the King's Education language college, returned to Christchurch for the ceremony held in Christchurch's botanic gardens.

Asakawa was was out at lunch when the February 22 quake struck.

About 100 people including dignitaries from China, Israel and the United States attended the ceremony in the gardens.

Many spoke of people from their own country who had lost their lives in the quake and their gratitude to the people of Christchurch.

A new garden and gold angel sculpture was also unveiled in memory of the 185 people who died.

People attending were also invited to hang messages on a nearby "wish tree".

One message said: "I wish we will all continue to help each other", another simply said: "please stay here".

At the end of the ceremony people were also invited to head down to the Avon River and throw flowers into the water.

10.30am: A memorial service for the Japanese victims of the quake has begun in Christchurch's botanic gardens.

10.07am: People gather for service where Japanese student will ring peace bell to remember her friends lost in the CTV building.

9.52am: Families of the victims are being taken on a tour of the central city, which includes the CTV and PGC buildings.

9.10am: Christchurch mayor Bob Parker steps into the crowd to thank family members for attending the Latimer Square Service.

Send us your photos and video as you mark the quake anniversary to newstips@stuff.co.nz

9.09am: An army sergeant leads the crowd in the national anthem to conclude the Latimer Square service.

9am: A Japanese minister says a prayer for his countrymen who were lost in the quake.

He is followed by a Buddhist minister.

8.57am: A member of the Jewish community talks about the three Israeli tourists who lost their lives, before saying a prayer.

8.49am: Prime Minister John Key tells victims' families that Government is committed to rebuilding this ''great city''.

He thanks all those who helped in the aftermath of the earthquake.

These included St John Ambulance, the police and urban search and rescue teams.

8.47am: Prime Minister John Key says the earthquake shook the country to its core.



''Worst of all it stole 185 loved ones from us and injured so many more.''

He recalled coming to Latimer Square in the hours after the quake.

Dust and smoke was thick in the air, there were fires, people huddling together under blankets and aftershocks continuously rattled the city.

Key says the scenes will live in his memory for the rest of his life.

He acknowledged those who had lost loved ones and welcomed overseas visitors.

The pain and sorrow were heavy burdens to carry.

Key says the thoughts and sympathies "of our small nation" are with you all.

8.42am: Prime Minister John Key says the date February 22, 2011 is permanently etched into everyone's minds.

"It'll go down in the history of New Zealand as one of our darkest days."

It started as an ordinary day with students together in class, shoppers shopping and workers working. But, at 12.51pm the city of Christchurch and the lives of many changed forever.

8.40am: Christchurch Mayor Bob Parker says: "I hope that you can all move forward".

"As we all need to move forward together."



He paid tribute to the rescue staff from overseas, including Australia and China.



He also acknowledged the work of the New Zealand teams, including St John.

8.39am: Parker says Christchurch was transformed into a United Nations international effort within 24 hours of the quake.

8:35am: Christchurch mayor Bob Parker says the anniversary "is a heavy day"

"It is heavy with loss and emotion,'' he says.

"Nothing in our lives could have shown us what was to happen on this day a year ago."

He said everyone thought the city was on the road to recovery.

"Everything changed. Everything changed; it will never be the same again."

8.29am: Henare Rakiiha Tau says we seek strength from our creator and ancestors.

He says our tears are your tears and our grief is your grief.

8.26am: Special service for family of quake victims officially opens in Christchurch's Latimer Square with Maori greeting.

8.20am: St John Ambulance, police and army staff are talking with Christchurch mayor Bob Parker before the Latimer Square service starts.

It was due to start at 8am.

After the service, families will be escorted behind the cordon to the Canterbury Television Building site, the PGC building sand Cathedral Square.

8.17: Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee told RNZ he thought the quake-related agencies had worked well.

There are one or two areas where the council could improve.

8.16: Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee says the Government already stands behind EQC.

''We're lucky to have EQC because it allowed for things to be done quickly, compared to having to deal with private insurance.''

8.15am: People attending Latimer Square memorial clutch each other.

Others wear matching red 'In memory of' T-shirts and many are holding flowers.

The families are in a private area which is fenced off from the public and media.

8.04am: Families of quake victims are welcomed to a special service in Christchurch's Latimer Square.

7.55am: Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee says there are a lot of lessons for other parts of New Zealand.

7.53am: Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee says the Government has been providing insurers with more information.

Brownlee says insurance brokers need to be more innovative.

7.51am: Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee says the day is all about reflection.

7.50am: Army Band warms up as about 100 journalists, photographers and camera crew gather in Latimer Square for memorial service, due to start at 8am.

The service will open with a Maori welcome followed by speeches from Christchurch mayor Bob Parker, Bishop Victoria Matthews and Prime Minister John Key. Labour leader David Shearer will give a reading.

7.37am: Family members begin gathering for special service in Christchurch's Latimer Square to remember quake victims.

7.29am: Superintendent Dave Cliff tells RNZ he was so proud of police officers as they came into work on the day of the quake.

7.28am: Superintendent Dave Cliff, who was Canterbury District Commander at the time of the February quake, tells RNZ people need to understand that people working for EQC and the council are going through the same thing as them.

7.24am: Cera chief Roger Sutton tells RNZ they would like to get much of the city-centre cordon down by April.

''We are trying to do the best thing for the city.''

7.23am: Cera chief Roger Sutton says in any event like this there are always going to be frustrations with bureaucracy, but people are working their guts out to make things better.

7.19am: Cera chief Roger Sutton says Christchurch is very much open for business.

The economy is going strongly and there are a lot of places to go out to. The city is still a great place to live, he says.

7.18am: Cera chief Roger Sutton says while CBD is important people want to see their homes fixed first.

7.17am: Cera chief Roger Sutton says the city's CBD will become a much more vibrant space.

6.54am: Christchurch mayor Bob Parker says the scale of the task is much more than people ever imagined.

6.53am: Christchurch mayor Bob Parker says everyone is working hard and well together to get the city fixed.

6.51am: Christchurch mayor Bob Parker says in televion interview that it is going to be a long and sad day for the city.

''Our city has changed in ways we have never imagined.''

6.19am: Cera chief Roger Sutton says in television interview that there is an awful lot do and at times it can be overwhelming.

He says it is very frustrating for a lot of people - particularly those waiting to hear about their homes and land.

6.18am: Cera (Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority) chief Roger Sutton says for a start he couldn't actually believe what was happening when the quake hit.

6.00am: Welcome to our live coverage of the events in Christchurch and around the country as we mark the first anniversary of the deadly February 22 quake.

- The Press

Comments