Christchurch's '1 per cent' chance of big quake RACHEL YOUNG

Daniel Tobin

Dr Kelvin Berryman, explains the chance of future quakes for the Canterbury region using the latest GNS quake forecast model.

Relevant offers

Previous earthquake forecasts for Canterbury have been a little "pessimistic", a scientist says.

Dr Kelvin Berryman, of GNS Science, said today there was a 1 per cent chance of a magnitude-7.0 or higher earthquake in the next year.

The figures, released by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) today, were based on a model devised by scientists from the United states, Ireland, Australia and New Zealand.

They are forecasts for the 12 months to January 15, 2013, and show that quakes will continue to be a feature in Canterbury for decades.

There was a 13 per cent chance of a magnitude-6.0 to 6.4 quake, down 17 per cent from the previous model, and a 82 per cent chance of a 5.0 to 5.4 quake within the year, Berryman said.

He said there was a "pretty good chance" there was a low probability of having a quake higher than 6.0.

The figures were all subject to change as quakes happened and the model changed, he said.

The forecast probability of damaging quakes in Canterbury during and after rebuilding in the region was reduced by 20 per cent compared with earlier forecasts, Berryman said.

"The future looks more optimistic."

Cera chief executive Roger Sutton said the numbers were taking the region out of the "catastrophic range".

MORE DAMAGE WARNINGS

There are potentially several dangerous buildings which haven't been identified in Christchurch.

Quake leaders are now urging all property owners to re-check their buildings for damage caused by December 23.

Canterbury earthquake recovery minister Gerry Brownlee said building owners should get their buildings checked again following the aftershocks in December.

"It's worth going to have a look. We are getting damage on damage."

It was possible there were buildings "out there" which had sustained potentially dangerous damage, he said.

Sutton confirmed AMI's Hadlee stand was going to be demolished but the fate of the rest of the stadium was not yet known.

Sutton reiterated building owners needed to have buildings rechecked as there had been further damage in the December 23 earthquakes.

- The Press

Comments