Christchurch rebuild agency's mandate could be expanded

SUPPLIED Cr Tim Scandrett believes Sydenham could also benefit from Regenerate Christchurch's attention.

The new rebuild agency charged with overseeing the development of the central city, the residential red zone and New Brighton may also target other areas of the city that are struggling.

While Regenerate Christchurch's initial brief is to oversee the long term development and enhancement of the central city, the residential red zone and New Brighton both Mayor Lianne Dalziel and Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee say the organisation's brief could be expanded to cover other quake-ravaged areas.

The Christchurch City Council already has master plans in place for many of the worst hit areas of the city but it does not have the means of implementing them.

Regenerate Christchurch will have the ability to put together plans that carry statutory weight. It may be able to designate land for special purposes and compulsorily acquire property, as it has been able to do in the central city under the Christchurch Central Recovery Plan.

Dalziel said Sydenham was a good example of another area that could benefit from Regenerate Christchurch's attention.

Brownlee said he would consider giving Regenerate Christchurch the mandate to work in other areas beyond the central city, the residential red zone and New Brighton if asked to do so by the council.

Spreydon-Heathcote councillor Tim Scandrett said he believed a strong case could be made for adding Sydenham to the list of areas deserving special attention and was keen to discuss it with the local community.

"The only one of the list at the moment is New Brighton but I think Sydenham should definitely be on there," Scandrett said.

Judy Stack, from the business group Sydenham Quarter, agrees.

"We would love it because it [Sydenham] is a bit forgotten," Stack said.

The Sydenham Quarter had done its best to help regenerate the area but it would really benefit from having an agency like Regenerate Christchurch step in as the suburb was "up against the wall". It had many undeveloped sections and was reeling from the decision to put a waste transfer station on the main street. While there was a master plan for Sydenham, it was toothless.

"One of the wonderful things Regenerate Christchurch could do is use them [the master plans] as a blueprint for the development of areas. Hundreds and hundreds of hours have been spent on building those plans, not to mention the costs of bringing them together ... and they are sitting on someone's shelf. It is toothlesss and they shouldn't be because they are exactly what people wanted," Stack said.

"The council tries to do its best but the reality is that it is hamstrung by finances."

The council and the Government are jointly funding Regenerate Christchurch and hope to have it fully operational by April next year, which is when the mandate for the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority is set to end.

Dalziel said the level of funding required for Regenerate Christchurch was still being worked out. Christchurch residents would be consulted about the financing arrangements during next year's Annual Plan process.

- Stuff