Church announces new deal for Christ Church Cathedral

JOHN KIRK-ANDERSON/FAIRFAX NZ The future of the iconic Christ Church Cathedral is yet to be confirmed.

An independent Government-appointed consultant will be brought in to negotiate plans for the earthquake-damaged Christ Church Cathedral after four years of deadlock.

Plans for the future of Christchurch's iconic cathedral stalled in 2011 after Anglican leaders came out in support of plans to partially demolish the building.

They had faced ongoing opposition from heritage campaigners, particularly the Great Christchurch Building Trust (GCBT), which wanted the old cathedral to be fully restored.

Bishop Victoria Matthews made the announcement to a full house at the Christ Church Transitional Cathedral on Hereford St on Thursday evening.

"In the midst of many people telling us how to proceed, we have not wanted disproportionate resources focused on the Cathedral especially when we have wider responsibilities in Christian leadership," she said.

"We are also aware that indecision about the future of Christ Church Cathedral is having a significant effect on the re-birth of Christchurch from the centre outward."

READ MORE:

* Christ Church Cathedral a 'symbol of negativity'

* Offer to protect Christ Church Cathedral from weather snubbed

* Sir Miles Warren design may break four year Christ Church Cathedral deadlock

Matthews said the consultant would "engage with the experts" of both Church Property Trustees (CPT) and the GCBT before reporting back to the Government.

"The Government does acknowledge the need for a safe and liturgically appropriate worship space whilst recognising the city's need for an identifying symbol in Cathedral Square."

CPT had agreed to participate on the condition it was not financially responsible for the cost of the consultant or any outcomes.

"It is my hope and commitment that before Christmas we will know the details about the future of Christ Church Cathedral as well as the larger Diocesan recovery plan," Matthews said.

GCBT co-chairman Jim Anderton said the Government's move to bring in an independent consultant was "very responsible".

He praised Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee for playing an important role in keeping "all the options open".

There had not been "any major engineering dispute" between the two parties, but there had never been an independent mediator involved and he was "looking forward to this making some very significant progress".

"Now that we've got this process in action, I'm hopeful we can make some rapid progress," Anderton said.

"No one will be more pleased than us to get out of the courts and into the construction business - or reconstruction."

NEW DEAN FOR CATHEDRAL

The church also announced Reverend Lawrence Kimberley would be the new dean for Christ Church Cathedral.

Kimberley had been the Vicar of the Opawa and St Martins parish since 2011. He was previously Vicar of Heathcote and Mt Pleasant.

The role had been empty since Dean Lynda Patterson died suddenly last year. Northern Irish-born Patterson, 40, died of natural causes in her home in July 2014 after an undisclosed illness. She was the Cathedral's first female dean.

Patterson's predecessor, Peter Beck, described her passing as a huge loss for Christchurch and the Anglican church.

"The church and the community at large has lost quite a taonga, a treasure, an amazing theologian, and probably the finest preacher I've ever heard," he said.

TIMELINE:

February 2011: Cathedral damaged in major earthquake.

December 2011: Cathedral further damaged in two aftershocks.

March 2012: Bishop Matthews confirms the Christ Church Cathedral is to be demolished.

April 2012: Demolition begins with west wall of spire.

November 2012: Demolition work put on hold by the High Court.

April 2013: Three options presented to public for cathedral: modern replacement, restoration, rebuild with modern materials.

September 2013: Modern option chosen by church.

May 2014: High Court lifts injunction stopping demolition. This was upheld in the Appeal Court in July.

September 2015: Anglican diocese announce plans to bring in an independent Government-appointed consultant

- Stuff