A documentary series puts the city's recovery under the microscope. Will Harvie reports.

Some of the images in Paua Productions' latest trio of earthquake documentaries are only a few months old, but the demolitions in central Christchurch have happened so quickly that the film-makers have documented a period that's now almost gone.

"We are under the microscope," says Paua producer Veronica McCarthy.

"We are the goldfish bowl of the world - a First-World country experiencing something of this magnitude. There are many, many lessons to be learnt - what we've done correctly and what we could have done better. It's important in terms of archiving and documenting that we show that, so in 20 years, a new generation of people can look at that and and say, 'wow'."

Collectively known as Aftermath, the trio opens this Monday (8.30pm, Prime) and carries on for a few weeks. An earlier documentary in the series, Aftermath: Where the Faults Lie, aired about the time of the second anniversary of the February 22, 2011, quake and a fifth, Aftermath: The Triumph of the City, will be made once the rebuild is under way and some interesting buildings have been finished.

Paua's first quake documentary, A Shocking Reminder, was so well received that Prime aired an encore within a week of the premiere.

A Shocking Reminder was "very much from the heart", says McCarthy. It was was an "observational, living experience".

The Aftermath documentaries, on the other hand, are "absolutely aftermath".

"They're [about] longitudinal studies, research driven, and have a lot of experts, national and international."

Which isn't to say there aren't human stories. Paua dug up some heartbreak. Meet, for example, Nick and Jenny Barlow, who owned a cleaning business in central Christchurch which, before the February quake employed 85 staff and had contracts and equipment in 65 central-city buildings.

"Even if you lost a contract here or there," says Nick Barlow of his business, "it wouldn't make much difference."

But to lose every contract and almost all their cleaning kits in one day?

"It was totally shutdown," Nick says in the documentary, Aftermath: Doing Business, which airs early next month. The two are still in business, but barely.

Meet, too, Liz Cammock, who survived the collapse of the Canterbury Television Building and then lost her family home when it was red-zoned.

"The stress of daily uncertainty and not knowing what the future holds is having an impact on many people," Cammock says in Aftermath: On the Road to Resilience, which airs on August 26.

"In that social documentary, we have psychologists tracking how we are as a community and as a city, and how we are responding to that," McCarthy says.

Canterbury, she notes, is "absolutely following" international disaster recovery trends.

The first of the current trio, Aftermath: Heritage Matters, which airs on Monday, is a topical look at lost heritage buildings.

It was a moving beast, she says.

The Court of Appeal decision on the future of Christ Church Cathedral and the hullabaloo over McLean's Mansion both occurred late in the production cycle, but Paua managed late edits to get them into the film, albeit briefly.

Here is an early stated fact from the documentary: Christchurch lost 220 heritage buildings to demolition and not one to the shaking.

McCarthy isn't only an earthquake documentarian these days. She is just back from the north India region of Ladakh, where thousands of feral dogs roam. In the summer tourist season, they can survive quite well. In winter, when food is short, they become "packs of starving predators, attacking livestock and people".

McCarthy was documenting a group called Vets Beyond Borders, which works with local groups to desex and vaccinate the animals. The "labour of love" project needs further funding to become a film.

Another Paua principal, Virginia Wright is documenting the sex-slave trade in Asia for Television New Zealand and, hopefully, international film markets.

International experience often informs Aftermath. "We've gone further than Christchurch . . . because it is going to happen in Wellington, sooner or later," says McCarthy. "We hope it's going to be a long time coming, so that Wellington is truly safe, but in terms of social experiences, it's going to be the same.

"I hope there won't be the same number of deaths. That aside, all those others issues - employment, business, social housing, accommodation - will be very similar. Heritage, in particular. It's all here for us to learn from."

- The Press

Comments