Come on in, urges Christchurch rebuild developer

KIRK HARGREAVES 'The new city is a playground,' says KPI Rothschild Property Group Co-Director Shaun Stockman.

Central Christchurch needs you.

That's the message from the property developer behind locations including Stranges Lane in High St and Kensington House in Manchester St.

The developer, Shaun Stockman of KPI Rothschild, says the heart of any central city is its people.

KPI Rothschild has a portfolio of central Christchurch buildings, many historic, and has repaired some of those lost to the quakes and repaired and renovated others. Stockman says being part of a vibrant, thriving central city was the driving force behind his decision to rebuild.

The company's buildings typically combine office, retail and hospitality spaces.

"Living, working and playing centrally creates a great vibe, and that's what I'm really looking forward to as the rebuild continues."

"People are the fabric of life in a city, and living centrally is a great way to really connect with others."

Stockman has come out in support of the Live Central campaign, which aims to encourage inner city living and has a target of 20,000 residents in central Christchurch by 2024.

The campaign website sets out the options on offer, including plans for the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority's planned 14 hectare North and East Frame, and private developers' apartment projects in areas including Oxford Tce, Colombo, Manchester, Madras, Salisbury, Barbadoes and Hereford Sts, and Gracefield Ave.

New apartment complexes such as the Leicester Executive Apartments on Madras St are well underway, but others including the government-sponsored Demonstration Village are yet to get off the ground.

Existing apartments are for sale in low-rise complexes in many locations just outside the Frame, plus a few inside the Frame such as those above the Rendezvous Hotel in Gloucester St.

Stockman says that the rebuilt city will be better than before and while it is exciting seeing new developments coming to live, some people are not aware of how things are changing.

"It's a shame that there are people who still have not been back to the central city to see what's happening. I'd suggest people get back in and have a look."

His advice to people considering living in the central city is simple – "do it".

"Enjoy the buzz of living centrally. It's a perfect place to be for people who want an easy care lifestyle and there is something for everyone. The new city is a playground – just get stuck in!"

- Stuff