Condition of Christchurch's Old Municipal Chambers 'deteriorating'

STACY SQUIRES/FAIRFAX NZ Christchurch City Council staff are worried about the worsening condition of the quake-damaged Old Municipal Chambers.

Money set aside for the restoration of the Canterbury Provincial Chambers could be diverted to the Old Municipal Chambers because of its deteriorating condition.

Both of the historic chambers were severely damaged in the February 2011 earthquake and needed about $120 million spent on them - money which the Christchurch City Council was struggling to find.

While the council had $40m in its 10-year budget to put towards the estimated $108m cost of restoring and strengthening the Canterbury Provincial Chambers, no money had been set aside for repairing the Old Municipal Chambers on the corner of Oxford Tce and Worcester Blvd.

Council staff were recommending though that a quarter of the funds allocated for the Canterbury Provincial Chambers buildings be reallocated to the Old Municipal Chambers because they were worried about the building's worsening condition.

Councillors would consider their recommendation on Thursday.

Since the quakes a significant sum had been spent on temporarily stabilising the Canterbury Provincial Chambers buildings and making them weather-tight, but the Old Municipal Chambers had only received some external facade protection and its condition was slowly deteriorating.

READ MORE:

* $108m needed to restore earthquake-damaged Canterbury Provincial Chambers

* Rodents and rot: Canterbury Provincial Chambers a long-term fix

The dilemma facing the council was that if it took money from the restoration budget for the Canterbury Provincial Chambers buildings and spent it on the Old Municipal Chambers, it might not be able to proceed with the second stage of repairs on the Canterbury Provincial Chambers buildings.

The Canterbury Provincial Chambers buildings, at the corner of Armagh and Durham streets, dated back to the 1850s and were widely acknowledged as New Zealand's most outstanding examples of high Victorian gothic revival architecture.

In the February 2011 earthquake, the stone chamber, built in 1865, immediately collapsed and the stone towers at both Armagh and Durham streets had to be removed because they were so badly damaged.

The Old Municipal Chambers were also architecturally and historically important. The building was the first Queen Anne arts and craft style building in New Zealand and was the only surviving example of the style in Christchurch. It was also the first permanent, purpose-built building designed for the Municipal Council, the forerunner of the Christchurch City Council.

Heritage advocate Dr Anna Crighton, a member of the Canterbury Provincial Chambers advisory group, said if there was any risk of the Old Municipal Chambers deteriorating further then work on that building should be fast-tracked as it was too valuable to risk losing. It was not only an important heritage building but an important community facility that had well used prior to the quakes.

"The Canterbury Provincial Chambers has been mothballed and shored up . . . and I don't believe it is at risk because long-term it is going to be restored. If the Old Municipal Chambers are that bad I totally agree that [work on] it should be fast-tracked," Crighton said.

Historic Places Canterbury chairman Mark Gerrard said it was concerning that the condition of the Old Municipal Chambers was deteriorating and he fully supported diverting some of the funds from the Canterbury Provincial Chambers to its restoration.

It was an important heritage building on a prominent site and getting restoration work started on it would send a strong message to visitors to the city that the rebuild was in full swing, he said.

- Stuff