'Corporate storyteller' hired for health precinct promotion

SUPPLIED An artist's impression of the development planned for Oxford Tce as part of Christchurch's health precinct.

An Auckland-based "corporate storyteller" has been hired to boost the profile of Christchurch's planned health precinct.

The health precinct – bordered by St Asaph St, Tuam St and Oxford Tce – was announced when the Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) unveiled its central city blueprint in 2012.

The Canterbury District Health Board, University of Otago, University of Canterbury and the Christchurch Polytechnic Institute of Technology were expected to be the main tenants of the precinct but had so far not confirmed their plans.

The Greater Christchurch Urban Development Strategy held a committee meeting on Friday and members received an update about two central city anchor projects - the health precinct and Metro Sports Facility.

The executive officer of the Health Precinct Advisory Council, Emma Hodgkin, said the council had worked hard to come up with a strong "brand" for the project and now wanted to focus on boosting its profile.

"We've engaged a corporate storyteller who is interviewing people and students . . . and formulating ways to communicate how [the precinct] will be relevant to them."

She said the CCDU had commissioned PwC to undertake a business case for the development of a Research Centre of Excellence.

The advisory council hoped to attract international investment and researchers into the precinct and said GE Healthcare had already shown an interest.

CCDU director Baden Ewart said the development of the precinct was making "steady process" and positive steps were being made.

READ MORE:

* Poor planning behind Christchurch's Metro Sports Facility

* Project a first for health precinct

* Land prices shrink Christchurch's south frame

The Ministry of Health-led Acute Services building was on track for completion in 2018, he said. The 10-storey building would include operating theatres, intensive care, radiology, acute medical assessment and an expanded emergency department.

Countrywide Property's development at 32 Oxford Tce was nearing completion, Ewart said.

The developments, involving well-known Christchurch property developer Richard Diver, were the only private sector investments to be confirmed for the precinct.

Ewart said other private sector developments were expected to be announced in the coming months.

Meanwhile, CCDU development director John O'Hagan provided a brief update on the Metro Sports Facility and said the ground conditions and geotechnical engineering solutions required on the site were "more challenging" than previously thought.

The facility – initially expected to be open in 2017 – was now scheduled for completion in 2020. O'Hagan said the Government was doing what it could to try and have the project completed by 2019.

He said the CCDU hoped to have a design team on board by December, with the project's design completed by March 2017.

- Stuff