Daniel Tobin

Boffa Miskell will be the lead company in a consortium of businesses that will design the central Christchurch rebuild.

City councillors need to trust the consortium charged with redesigning central Christchurch, the deputy mayor says.

A consortium led by Christchurch-based consultancy firm Boffa Miskell has been awarded the $1 million contract to redesign the inner city.

The group includes Australian consultancy firm Populous and urban design company Woods Bagot, Christchurch architects Warren and Mahoney, and Sheppard & Rout and Auckland-based project management firm RCP.

The group started work at the Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) offices yesterday and has 77 days to deliver a blueprint for the central business district.

It will identify where anchor projects, such as the new convention centre and public transport hub, will be placed and how city blocks will be formed around them.

Deputy Mayor Ngaire Button said councillors needed to trust the CCDU's choice. "It wasn't our call to make. It's their decision and they're accountable for it."

She said the local flavour of the consortium was a good sign for the city.

"They've dealt with our staff over the years, and I've seen them at many meetings and resource consent hearings, so they know the city well," she said.

Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce chief executive Peter Townsend was happy with the "first important step".

He said the consortium looked to have "all of the ingredients we need to make central Christchurch an exciting place for the future".

"The mix of expertise that Boffa Miskell have put together seems to have a good mix of international skill and experience, combined with top-end local expertise," Townsend said.

Boffa Miskell director Don Miskell said being chosen to lead the design was an "enormous privilege".

"The Share an Idea concept has laid the groundwork for this rebuild in a truly collective and collaborative way," he said.

Other consortium members contacted by The Press yesterday said they were not allowed to comment on the appointment and referred all questions to the CCDU.

The group has the scope to add to the 12 anchor projects identified and will put forward several options for the location of each.

CCDU chief executive Warwick Isaacs said the unit and the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) would then talk with the owners of the land in question.

"We would look at ownership and discuss those things with the owners so [when the blueprint is done] it's not going to be a surprise to them."

Cera has the power to compulsorily acquire land under the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act and combine titles. Chief executive Roger Sutton said such action was "possible but unlikely".

"What we generally prefer is those parties who own that land negotiate between themselves, rather than getting us involved," he said.

"If necessary, we will get involved and clearly we may have to ... if particular facilities are going to go in particular places."

The consortium will deliver a preliminary report on May 18 and a first draft by June 15. The final draft is due by the end of June for referral to Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee before being approved by the Government by July 27.

THE CONSORTIUM

Boffa Miskell – Environmental consultancy firm specialising in planning, landscape architecture and urban design. Has offices across NZ and in Shanghai. Major projects include the Picton waterfront, the Millbrook resort at Queenstown and the "tank farm" development on Wynyard Quarter in Auckland.

Populous – Australian-based consultancy firm specialising in sports facilities and convention centres. It worked on the London Olympic stadium, Yankee Stadium in New York City and Forsyth Barr Stadium in Dunedin.

Bagot Woods – Has offices across North America, Europe, Asia, Australia and the Middle East. Portfolio includes 80 Queen Street, Auckland, the Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre (in collaboration with NH Architecture) the Adelaide Convention Centre and Perth International Airport.

Warren and Mahoney – One of NZ's largest architectural practices, it was established in 1955 by Miles Warren and Maurice Mahoney, and designed a series of celebrated brutalist buildings in Christchurch in the 1960s and 70s.

Sheppard & Rout – Designed the mirrored-glass office tower overlooking Victoria Square in Armagh St, the Fisher Galleries in Victoria St and the expansion of the international terminal at Christchurch Airport.

RCP – Project management company specialising in construction. Key projects include Christchurch's civic offices in Hereford St. It has worked as demolition manager for Cera.

- The Press

Comments