Couple's families fight for one-way street improvements after fatal crash

SUPPLIED Tony Tucker, left, remains in a critical condition after a crash with a wrong-way driver killed his husband, Michael James Burnby, 44, right, on October 3.

The families of a couple hit by a wrong-way driver are lobbying for improvements to Christchurch's one-way streets.

Critically injured Cruz bar co-owner Tony Tucker is showing signs of improvement in intensive care after the crash at the Durham St and Salisbury St intersection killed his husband.

Michael James Burnby, 44, died in hospital on Wednesday, after the crash on Saturday October 3.

FACEBOOK Aliielua Fesili Salaivao, 38, drove the van that collided with the couple's southbound car. He died at the scene. Police suspect he had been drinking.

The driver, Aliielua Fesili Salaivao, 38, died at the scene. Police suspected he had been drinking when he drove the wrong way up Salisbury St and struck their Audi.

The crash has prompted a petition on Change.org calling on the Christchurch City Council to fit flashing lights to the back of one-way intersection traffic lights. The lights would warn drivers travelling the wrong way.

The couple's friend, John Lawrence, is leading the campaign on behalf of the families. The petition has more than 650 supporters.

"As I've told the families, I'm not giving up on it, I will keep on fighting until something is done," he said.

Lawrence has sent letters to Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel and Labour MPs and would meet with Christchurch Central MP Nicky Wagner.

He said too many people have had near misses or were killed due to wrong-way drivers.

"Strangely enough, a few days after that accident I just about got hit by someone doing the exact same thing in the middle of the day.

"Even if we can save one life, that's one more family that doesn't have to suffer like the two families have over the last few days."

A Christchurch Hospital spokeswoman said Tucker remained in a critical condition.

Cruz bar has been providing updates on Tucker's condition via its Facebook page. His prognosis was positive but a long recovery lies ahead.

He has limited movement and is struggling with his short term memory.

As of 1am Monday, he remained in intensive care.

"[He] has been breathing all day without needing a ventilator, and tomorrow is expected to have the tube removed which has been draining his lung and chest."

On Friday, he cleared a major hurdle in his recovery by regaining consciousness and asking questions.

"6pm Friday: Tony is communicating questions and like the big strong ox he is he seems to have decisively beaten the odds against survival that he was given a few days ago.

READ MORE:

* Two fatal CBD crashes 500 metres apart

* 'Beautiful man' killed in central Christchurch crash

Police said Salaivao drove his van through a red light before speeding the wrong way up Salisbury St. He was not wearing a seatbelt and was thrown from the vehicle in the collision just before 11pm on Saturday.

- Stuff