Couple kickstart healthy living ahead of Summer Starter

IAIN MCGREGOR/Stuff.co.nz This couple have lost 31kg between them in 8 weeks

A Christchurch dad has lost more than 20 kilograms as he and his wife get fit to set a good example for their kids.

After eight weeks on a new exercise and healthy eating programme, Jeffrey Ah Kuoi has been able to walk into a clothing shop for the first time in more than six years and buy a dress shirt off the rack, rather than have it tailor-made.

Ah Kuoi and wife Barbara are part of a 73-strong group from IAG taking on its Canterbury Recovery Kickstarter programme to lose weight, improve eating habits and exercise more regularly.

IAIN MCGREGOR/FAIRFAX NZ Jeff Ah Kuoi saw the Kickstarter programme as a great way to get fit, lose weight and have a bit of fun with their colleagues along the way.

"Prior to the 12-week intervention my activity was purely restricted to - once I'd walked in the front door after a day at work - jumping in front of the PlayStation 3," Jeff Ah Kuoi said.

Ah Kuoi, who started at 144.5kg, had already exceeded his goal of losing 20kg during the 12 weeks, while his wife had dropped her weight from triple to double figures.

The Canterbury Recovery team pledged to lose 852.4kgs in total as part of the programme devised to tie in with The Press Summer Starter on November 29.

IAIN MCGREGOR/FAIRFAX NZ Barb Ah Kuoi's weight has always been in triple figures, but she's dropped to double digits through a 12-week exercise and healthy eating scheme.

While losing weight was the challenge for Ah Kuoi, the programme provided him with an opportunity to promote a healthier and more active lifestyle to his children.

"This is plagiarising someone else but it was a good one, 'be an example, don't be a cautionary tale' - and that's all the mantra that I apply while I'm engaged in what I'm doing right now."

Barb Ah Kuoi had ruled herself out of contention for final prizes, but she was "unofficially" sitting behind her husband in the top weight-loss spot.

"My motivation is to get him on top, so that's what I'm here for," she said.

Jeff and Barb Ah Kuoi had been together for 23 years and were fondly known within IAG as the "tag team".

A keen Zumba-goer, Jeff Ah Kuoi had started riding "shotgun" at the front of his Zumba classes and was helping show others how the moves were executed.

"It's been a big shift from where I've come from."

The couple had joined a gym and attended two-weekly bootcamps.

Although the intense exercise regime was not "sustainable", the pair were determined to continue their healthy lifestyle.

"We've been down this journey before, as a lot of people have," Jeff Ah Kuoi said.

"They've dropped the weight, they've put it back on. We're no different to that but the key difference I think that we've made this time round is that we're not buying into the shakes, we're not buying into the pre-prepared meals," he said.

Barb Ah Kuoi said the couple had "done all that before".

"This time we're just going into the supermarket, buying our own groceries and making better choices and we hope to carry that on after the 12 weeks," she said.

- Stuff