Court grants Crown's central Christchurch land grab

Monique Ford/Fairfax NZ The High Court has ruled the Crown can take over David Alexander's property at 115 Moorhouse Ave before paying compensation.

The High Court has allowed the Crown to take over a block of central Christchurch land before compensation has been paid to the landowner.

The property at 115 Moorhouse Ave, which had been used as a car sales yard, was identified in 2012 as part of the site for Christchurch's new Metro Sports Facility.

The Crown took steps under the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery (CER) Act to compulsorily acquire the land in 2013 following a failed negotiation process, but a dispute arose over whether it could take possession of the land before compensation issues were resolved.

Property owner David Alexander, of Ace Developments Ltd, earlier said he felt he was being bullied out of his site by a heavy-handed Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera).

"[Cera is] saying, 'if you don't take what we're offering, you'll get nothing and we'll see you in court on our terms."

In a judgement released on Friday, the High Court ruled in favour of the Crown, saying it was entitled to take over the land whether or not compensation had been finalised and paid.

Ace Developments argued that the Earthquake Recovery Minister should make an offer of compensation before taking the land under the Public Works Act and said the market value of the site was $3.3 million.

The Minister claimed the procedure under the CER Act was different though, and the Crown was entitled to vacant possession of the property now.

High Court Associate Judge Rob Osborne agreed and ordered Ace Developments and land occupier Ace Sales Ltd to give vacant possession of the property to the Minister on May 22.

Osborne refused to issue the landowner with a declaration specifying the minimum amount of compensation that should be paid.

The property was the last needed by Cera for the new Metro Sports Facility, which was expected to be completed in early 2020.

- Stuff