Court orders quake compensation land revised

Kirk Hargreaves/Fairfax NZ Faith boosted: Burwood home owner Barbara Byers was temporarily uninsured when the 2011 quake hit.

Barbara Byers always believed in insurance. Her faith just needed a boost.

READ MORE: Analysis: Red-zone 'fairness' argument rejected

It came on Friday, when the Supreme Court ruled the Government must reconsider its compensation offer to landowners in Christchurch's residential red zone with vacant, commercial or uninsured properties.

Dean Kozanic/Fairfax NZ Wary: Uninsured Bexley homeowner Martin Francis is wary the Government may short change red zoners like him, despite being ordered to review its compensation policy.

Byers is one of them. She was shopping around for a new policy on her Burwood home when the February 2011 earthquake struck. The property was later red-zoned and, because it was uninsured when the quake hit, she was offered half the Crown compensation for her land others received.

"I think it's great," she said of the court ruling. "Regardless of what happens now, it's been seen as being an unjust thing. You can't just discriminate against people like that. It was the injustice of it and this ruling ... is giving us justice."

More than 160 landowners did not qualify for the original Crown offer to red-zoners – a 2007 rateable valuation (RV) payout for their land and house.

The Supreme Court found, in a majority ruling, that the reduced offers "were not lawfully made".

"The [Canterbury Earthquake Recovery] Minister and the chief executive of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) should be directed to reconsider their decisions," it said.

The court found red zoners' insurance status should not have been a factor in determining what compensation they were entitled to. It also ruled that the Government had not properly considered the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act and its purpose of "social, economic, cultural and environmental wellbeing" when making the reduced offer.

The lack of consultation in formulating that offer and the delay in extending it (it was made 15 months after the initial red-zoning) were relevant factors, the court said, and should have been considered, along with "the current very difficult living conditions in the red zones".

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said Cera and Crown Law were reviewing the decision. He refused to comment further until he received advice.

The decision brings an end to two years of court battles. Two actions against the Government, one by property developer John Fowler, the other by a group of landowners known as the Quake Outcasts, were filed in mid-2013.

Quake Outcasts spokesman Ernest Tsao said the decision gave the group's members closure. "We have peace of mind now that justice is on our side and the Government is now being directed to do the right thing."

Outcasts solicitor Grant Cameron said he was "very pleased but not surprised" by the ruling. "In our view, this could have been resolved without any court process whatsoever."

The group would seek a meeting with the Government in about a week to discuss a new offer, Cameron said. He expected it to be 100 per cent RV.

The court did not advise how the offer should be reconsidered and some Outcasts were wary the battle may not be over. "It still gives us nothing in some ways," uninsured Bexley homeowner Martin Francis said. "[The Government] look upon it as their right to pay us out with the least they can get away with."

- The Press