Creative NZ's role in Christchurch arts rebuild

Craig Simcox Stephen Wainwright, Creative NZ CEO.

What are the conditions for an abundant life, particularly for residents in Christchurch since February 2011?

For Stephen Wainwright, CEO of Creative New Zealand, one answer could be: "I may have no running water but I did have a fantastic experience at an arts performance this evening."

For a big question about the meaning of life, Wainwright's response may initially seem a little flippant, but he makes perfectly tangible an important aspect of the contribution that the arts have made to the recovery of the city over the past four years.

Wainwright also draws attention to, not only the role that arts have to play in the wellbeing of the city's residents, but also their importance as an agent to attract people back to the central city and the accompanying social and economic impacts upon Christchurch.

Creative New Zealand has made a significant commitment to the arts. In its submission to the Christchurch City Council's Long Term Plan, it identified a series of major funding strategies implemented from 2011: $4.4 million for Christchurch arts organisations, (this included the Christchurch Symphony Orchestra and Court Theatre); $3.35 million in Earthquake Recovery Grants; $1 million towards Christchurch initiatives, (for example, BeatBox) and $1 million for 62 Christchurch arts projects and $1.255 million for grants through the Creative Communities Scheme. A total of almost $11 million.

How successful has Creative New Zealand been in delivering outcomes for the arts, the rebuild and the city? In its nationwide survey of participation in June this year; New Zealanders and the arts: attitudes, attendance and participation, Christchurch residents' enthusiasm for the arts as central to the rebuild appeared to have dropped from 73% in support of this principle in 2011 to 54% in 2014. Yet, the findings also seemed inconclusive with same poll revealing that participation in the arts over the same period had increased by 19%.

Certainly, Wainwright believes that as the City Council confronts the challenges of its long-term plan, the arts remain on the radar of residents and councillors.

"People are very positive about the arts and there is a greater awareness in Christchurch among residents of the arts ability to contribute to social cohesion and the economy of the city," he says.

"In addition, the Council has made a commitment to its assets for the arts; the Christchurch Art Gallery and Town Hall are both big wedges of money, the rebuild of the new central library is about to start and the Isaac Theatre Royal is open. There are also transitional arts projects. There is currently a wide funnel of opportunities for arts events and activities in this transitional phase. The arts are not operating in an either or situation. There is a diversity of approaches and all of these are reaffirming for the City Council."

In light of recent debate about the need for a Convention Centre in the central city, questions have inevitably been raised about the co-location of the Performing Arts Precinct. Wainwright is objective, yet optimistic about the Performing Arts Precinct and its role in the inner city as a centre for the arts and point of difference to attract visitors to Christchurch.

"The Blueprint for the rebuild included the performing arts precent and, in view of current circumstances, the need for it now is stronger than ever. The precinct also includes the Isaac Theatre Royal and the Christchurch Town Hall and collectively they are vital to the central city's future. A vibrant city's heart is central to a vibrant city."

If there is a noticeable passion in this last comment, it is also evident in Wainwright's thoughts on Creative New Zealand's immediate support in February 2011 and the art community's response.

"I was proud of Creative New Zealand's response to a situation as far away from business as usual as it could be. Seeing that it was necessary, CNZ responded in kind and there have been so many awesome projects take place in Christchurch. All we ever really do at CNZ is respond to great events from great artists and Christchurch has been blessed by so many people who have responded so cleverly and creatively in these circumstances."

Wainwright also commented with enthusiasm about the current exhibition at the Canterbury Museum Whole House Renew, a project that has seen a house from the Red Zone completely rebuild by craftspeople and artists as new furniture, toys, musical instruments and more.

He cited it as an exhibition that represented a great outcome for the arts and the city, raising important questions about the nature of human behaviour.

"How do we measure value in our world?"

Wainwright also acknowledged the new opportunities that have emerged for arts organisations to operate within: "Building coalitions between arts groups and institutions, sharing resources and supporting one another in new networks. There is an understanding of what can be achieved together in the arts. The arts in Christchurch have also encouraged residents to behave and respond differently to them. Creative New Zealand has more work to do, particularly in getting the message to the decision makers to make them realise that the arts can be transformative. The arts are practical things that make people's lives better. The nimbleness in how they deliver social and economic outcomes is impressive."

- The Press