'Dangerous phase looms for rebuild'

Michael Bradley Serious Fraud Office boss Julie Read.

Serious Fraud Office (SFO) boss Julie Read has signalled that the Christchurch rebuild is entering a dangerous phase where white collar criminals may siphon money from major building projects that are coming on stream.

In a rare interview, Read said that she was a little surprised at the lack of corruption in the city post-quake, but the relatively small nature of many jobs, particular housing construction, had not lent themselves to large-scale fraud.

According to latest figures, the SFO has received 29 complaints about suspect dealings in the rebuild.

It has launched six investigations - three of which have been closed without any further action.

No one has been prosecuted.

Officials have acknowledged conditions are ripe for major financial crime as billions of dollars are poured into the rebuild.

Types of possible fraud included price collusion, construction kickbacks/bribes and false insurance claims.

Read has kept a low profile since she was appointed as director of the SFO in September 2013.

She agreed to an interview after being approached with details of an investigation showing a growing number of rebuild-related firms are going bust despite a construction boom.

Read said two working groups, which had input from the likes of the Earthquake Commission (EQC), Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority and police, had identified possible danger areas post-quake and helped prevent corruption in the construction industry.

"I think the work everyone did ... in creating awareness of the risks led to a number of the agencies and the insurance companies putting in place risk mitigation strategies which have been successful to date."

In saying that, the relatively small value of many transactions, particularly in the home building sector, had not lent itself to major fraud, she said.

"You'd have to do an awful lot of jobs at a hideable premium."

However, there were a string of major government projects coming on stream, which posed a risk, Read said.

"For someone minded to do so there are probably better opportunities in these very large scale jobs to siphon off or to over charge significant amounts of money.

"We just have to make sure we keep our eye on the ball collectively and try and spot anything as soon as it might start to occur."

Many of the rebuild complaints the SFO had dealt with related to secret commissions, such as backhanders, or exaggerated billing, Read said.

Investigations spanned across many months because of the huge number of transactions involved.

In February last year SFO staff searched the head office of Maincom NZ in Woolston in February. The small to medium- sized company carries out repairs for EQC under the home repair scheme.

One of the company's directors, Warren Bale, confirmed he was being personally investigated. He denied any wrongdoing. The company had co-operated fully with authorities, Bale said.

This month an SFO spokeswoman confirmed its probe into the company was ongoing.

The most recent rebuild-related investigation was launched in September last year, she said.

In March last year, the SFO launched an investigation into post-quake fraud in Christchurch relied on an informant whose business dealings are now the subject of a police complaint.

The SFO probe between July, 2012, and April last year failed to uncover "evidence of serious and complex fraud".

It was sparked by a complaint from Lumley Insurance, which suspected contractors were inflating their earthquake damage assessments/ costings.

An investigation showed the SFO's main informant was builder Craig Johnson, 29, whose company, NZ Premium Construction, went into liquidation in February last year with debts of nearly $2 million.

* Do you have any information about the SFO investigations or any other rebuild-related fraud? Contact blair.ensor@press.co.nz or (03) 943 2543.

- Stuff