Delayed Avon River Precinct revamp threatens tourism

DEAN KOZANIC/The Press Tourists see a positive side to the Christchurch rebuild, though they say there is a long way to go.

A flagship Christchurch anchor project has stalled, sparking fears rebuild delays could threaten the city's international appeal.

The Avon River Precinct was due to be finished by the end of this year, but the Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) has extended that timeline to mid-2016.

It comes after delays to the controversial, permanent $253 million stadium, with a completion date pushed out to 2019, construction of public spaces in the south frame between Madras St and Hagley Ave now happening in 2016 and the development of recreational and commercial attractions for the Square also rescheduled to finish, six months later than planned, in the third quarter of 2016.

DEAN KOZANIC / Fairfax NZ The river bank opposite the Edmonds Band Rotunda site looks a bit overgrown.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said last year the Avon River Precinct would connect "people to the river and the river to the city in a way which will make it an outstanding and world-class attraction".

The reshaping, backed by $89m of Government money and $6m from Christchurch City Council, had not progressed as first outlined, Christchurch & Canterbury Tourism (CCT) chief executive Tim Hunter said.

Details of the river project had been promoted to international tourism wholesalers, who in turn sold Christchurch as a vibrant destination to travellers from Asia, Europe and elsewhere.

Visitors holding that image of Christchurch would be disappointed, Hunter said.

Hunter intends to lobby the Government, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) and the council to get the project back on track. Other work needed to get central Christchurch back in shape included progress on Antony Gough's The Terrace project and the Convention Centre precinct, he said.

"My biggest concern is that the rate of progress in the inner city is very slow and that we haven't had certain things happen the way that they were planned. The Avon River park . . . was announced to great fanfare in 2013 and a little piece was built down by Antigua boat shed.

"Apart from some remedial work on the river there's no evidence of any further building of that project at all. That's a huge disappointment because it's one of those iconic features of the new city that we've promoted strongly to the international travel trade.

"It's time for the various agencies to step up and say, look, we've got to get a more viable inner city for visitors. That means repairing the streets and footpaths and building the Avon River park," Hunter said.

Landscape architect Di Lucas said the work on the river was substandard, particularly the "in-stream" work that had included substantial use of volcanic rock in what was a soft sedimentary system.

CCDU acting director Baden Ewart said plans and tenders were still being prepared for work on

the remaining precinct phases.

The Terrace area, which is underway, would feature a promenade, extending from the boatsheds to the Margaret Mahy Family Playground.

"The promenade [will] be well progressed this year," Ewart said.

Christchurch Airport chief executive Malcolm Johns said certainty and momentum in the central city rebuild was critical.

The recovery was "deeply reliant on the pace of development in the CBD".

Johns planned to meet with Cera officials early this year on the latest project timelines and plans.

Christchurch and Canterbury Convention Bureau (CCCB) said last month it expected the first stage of a new Christchurch Convention Centre by late 2017 to remain on track.

A consortium of local players Ngai Tahu and property investor Philip Carter, led by Australian firm Plenary, won the tender for the $284m project between Worcester and Armagh streets

- The Press