Demolition order for historic Bishopscourt

Joseph Johnson/Fairfax NZ A demolition order has been granted for the historic Bishopscourt building and chapel within the Bishopspark Retirement Village in Park Tce, Christchurch.

Heritage advocates are furious approval has been given to demolish one of the last remaining buildings in Christchurch designed by renowned early 20th century architect Cecil Wood.

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) has granted a request for a section 38 demolition notice on the historic Bishop's Residence, known as Bishopscourt, within the Bishopspark Retirement Village in Park Tce, opposite Hagley Park.

The authority has declined a request for a demolition order on the neighbouring chapel though.

Bishopscourt was designed by Wood and built in 1926 as the residence of the city's Anglican bishop. It is owned by Anglican Care - an arm of the Anglican Diocese of Christchurch. It has the highest heritage rating possible in New Zealand with both a Heritage New Zealand category one and a Christchurch City Council group one classification.

"It's a masterpiece of 1920s colonial Georgian style domestic architecture. It is considered to be Wood's most important work of domestic architecture and is thought by many to be one of New Zealand's finest colonial Georgian style domestic designs," Historic Places Canterbury (HPC) deputy chairman Ross Gray said.

It was shocking and disappointing that Cera had given the demolition order as it was not a dangerous building nor was it holding up the timely and expeditious recovery of the city.

HPC wanted to know why Cera was still using section 38 to allow owners of heritage buildings to bypass the Resource Management Act when it had been many years since the last significant aftershock, Gray said.

Anglican Care sought a demolition order for both the Bishop's residence and the chapel because it claimed the condition of the buildings was impacting on the physical, mental and social wellbeing of those who lived and worked at the retirement village. It argued people were having to negotiate cordons on a daily basis because of the risk of the buildings collapsing.

Cera operations general manager John Cumberpatch said he had assessed the material provided by Anglican Care in support of its application and had taken advice from Cera's own engineer who determined the buildings were earthquake prone.

Cumberpatch said he was not persuaded that the chapel, which was out of the way of the elderly residents on the site, was having any detrimental affect on them, but it was clear the Bishop's Residence and its cordon were having an adverse impact, particularly on those who used wheelchairs and walking frames.

The situation was unique in that Cera was being asked to consider the use of demolition powers on an earthquake prone building while residents were still on site.

From his own visits to the site, Cumberpatch said he did consider those residents to be more affected by the buildings than the wider community and that the swifter any action might be taken to resolve the future of those buildings, the better it would be for the recovery of those residents.

It was also clear the costs of repairing the buildings to a standard that would mean they could withstand a moderate earthquake was beyond the amount for which Anglican Care had insurance, he said.

He acknowledged the heritage community might want to have a say on the demolition of the buildings or even seek to have them restored, or partly repaired while funding was found to restore them fully, but said that would create too much uncertainty.

"I am convinced it is necessary for me to commission works to demolish the Residence," he said.

- Stuff