Developer abandons Christchurch for Auckland

John Kirk-Anderson The BNZ building in Cathedral Square is half demolished and redevelopment plans for the site have been abandoned.

A Christchurch family investor group is taking its money to Auckland, citing a lack of tenants for high-rise office buildings.

Cristo Ltd has abandoned plans to develop the site of BNZ House in Cathedral Square, which it says is the subject of a dispute with the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera), and is looking for a buyer.

The building has become an eyesore, sitting half-demolished on the southern edge of the square for more than two years while developers and businesses head west to the banks of the Avon River.

Cristo director Stephen Bell said tenants were not interested in the site, stalling development plans for a multi-storey office building.

"The high-end tenants you need to make a building like that, a fairly expensive building, pay, seem to have settled elsewhere and are not really interested in coming right back into the CBD.

"The possibility of building offices in the centre of the city now seems quite remote."

The consortium had encountered similar problems at its other properties, he said, and had sold four vacant sites around the square and Gloucester St and another on the corner of Hereford St and Oxford Tce.

"We've basically shifted the bulk of our investment activities to Auckland. We were going to spend a lot in the central city and we now won't spend a single cent."

Bell said Cristo was "in dispute" with Cera over BNZ House but declined to say how. He hoped a settlement would be reached by the end of the month.

Cera dismantled seven storeys of the building during make-safe work in 2012 and handed the remainder back to Cristo, despite the contract being for a complete demolition. Bell at the time described the move as a "considerable difficulty". The discovery of asbestos in the building had further complicated matters.

A Cera spokesman declined to comment on any dispute with Cristo.

"The work managed by Cera to make the building safe is complete and any further actions in relation to the building rests with the owner."

Cristo's move comes as other developers are forced to adapt to the post-earthquake property market. Antony Gough this week said he would offer rents at pre-earthquake to lure tenants to his hospitality precinct, The Terrace.

Miles Yeoman, director of Canterbury Property Investments, which bought the old Press building with plans to build a replica hotel, said the days of office towers in and around Cathedral Square were gone.

"I think the square suits travellers, accommodation and hospitality."

Small, boutique residential accommodation would drive development in the surrounding blocks, he said.

"Office space is pretty well catered for at the moment."

Developer Richard Peebles said lack of progress on the new convention centre, planned for the west side of the square, and the quake-damaged Christ Church Cathedral was holding development in the area back.

"If they got the cathedral done that environment would look a lot better, but at the moment who the hell wants to go in on the BNZ site overlooking the bloody cathedral?"

"Once (they) get started that's going to kick some development off. It's getting over that hump."

Rentals for more than $400s a square metre, which Bell said were needed to make a high-rise development on the BNZ site viable, were unsustainable, Peebles said, especially when tenants wanted to be on the west bank of the Avon River and could do so for much less.

"I had a meeting with a tenant the other day… they wouldn't look down Hereford St, they wouldn't look at the square. They wouldn't even consider it. And that's not unusual."

Knight Frank director of valuation Will Blake said existing developments had largely catered for office space demand, meaning the old CBD – Cathedral Square and surrounds – "could be in for quite a long period of not much activity".

"It certainly does look like the central city has shifted to the west and become a bit more elongated rather than just clustered around the square."

- Stuff