Do you recognise this building? DAVID WILLIAMS

Daniel Tobin

Media were given a tour of the red zone, where further damage from the June 13 quake can be seen. By Daniel Tobin

Demolition work changing the face of central Christchurch needs to keep its urgent pace, Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee says.

Brownlee told The Press during a tour of the central city red zone that the powerful June 13 aftershocks meant many buildings previously thought to be salvageable would have to come down.

"I think there's a huge amount of work going on in here now and it just has to progress. There can't be any hold-ups.

"The city is going to look very, very different once all the demolition is completed but I think there's real urgency now to get that done."

Most of the sentiment around buildings had gone as people realised "there was not a lot of hope for most of these buildings and, frankly, not a great future for them even if they were to be saved," Brownlee said.

"The ones that are saved we can all be confident will be safe and quite suitable for re-occupation and I think [the quicker] we get to that clearly defined line the better."

About 25 demolitions are under way, including high-profile sites such as the Whitcoulls building in City Mall, the old Regent building in Cathedral Square and the Ruben Blades building on the corner of Lichfield and Manchester St. Other buildings have already been cleared, including the east side of Chancery Ln and several sites at the western end of City Mall.

Demolition of The Press building, in Cathedral Square, will start within days.

June 13's quakes caused further damage to historic buildings in High St and Brownlee said saving them was now "an impossible proposition".

"There'll always be people who say you can do it, but you'd have to have very deep pockets and an incredible amount of patience."

However, High St Precinct Group interim chairman Laurie Rose, who owns two buildings between St Asaph and Tuam St, refused to give up on the idea. "This group believes that there is an alternative and it should be explored before the bulldozers go through," he said.

Huge task ahead in central city

Since June 13, Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) officials have been using broad powers granted under special legislation to issue urgent demolition notices.

The tour of the red zone was used to highlight progress in the still-dangerous central city. More than 500 workers involved with the demolition and recovery operation have access to the cordoned zone.

Almost five months after February 22's earthquake, there was still stock on shop shelves, fridges full of refreshments and cafe tables with abandoned bottles on them.

Loose bricks teetered on walls of roofless, earthquake-ruptured buildings.

City authorities are still planning to open shops in the western end of City Mall in time for Cup and Show Week, in October, as a public morale booster.

However, Brownlee said it would be a tough ask. He said demolition contractors were working as fast as they could.

Cera demolition manager Warwick Isaacs said he expected the rate of demolition to accelerate in the coming weeks. Some demolition contractors were working weekends, he said, but not all.

"In an ideal world we'd go 24/7, but we've got equipment capacity issues and workforce and we just have to manage that."

He was reluctant to say when the central-city cordon might shrink, but he said there would be rapid changes close to Cup and Show Week.

Cera will seek public input to its recovery strategy at community workshops, starting Thursday.

Tall buildings begin to disappear from city

Demolition contracts for six tall, earthquake-shattered buildings in central Christchurch should be awarded in the next week, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) says.

A list released to The Press shows that contracts to knock down the Copthorne Hotel in Durham St, the Gallery Apartments in Gloucester St and the Anderson building in Lichfield St should be awarded on Monday.

Other buildings that will have tenders confirmed by Friday are Red Bus's headquarters in Ferry Rd, The Establishment in Peterborough St and York House in Worcester St.

The contract to pull down Fidelity House in Victoria St was awarded yesterday.

The Rolleston Court Apartments in Cambridge Tce have been knocked down, as have Kenton Chambers in Hereford St.

Demolition has started on three other tall buildings – Cashel St's Hotel Grand Chancellor, the country's biggest demolition job, the Christchurch Business Centre on the same street and Harcourts in Madras St.

Cera expects 1200 commercial buildings, including 900 in the central city will have to be demolished.

During a tour of the cordoned central-city red zone yesterday, Cera demolition manager Warwick Isaacs said the fate of some buildings – including the Brannigans building and the Farmers car park in Gloucester St, the Copthorne Central in Colombo St, Hereford St's BNZ building and the badly cracked Warners Hotel in Cathedral Square – had not been decided.

It was hoped the Victoria Apartments in Victoria Square could be saved.

In Cathedral Square, the old Regent building is being pulled down, and a contract has been let for Base Backpackers, on the Square's north side. Chancery Lane has disappeared, and buildings between Cathedral Square and Gloucester St have been pulled down.

Demolition of The Press building will start soon.

Cera is negotiating with the owners of the Clarendon Tower, on the corner of Worcester St and Oxford Tce, for its demolition.

On February 22, Forsyth Barr's internal stairwell collapsed, forcing office workers to abseil from windows, but Isaacs said the building would be saved.

Many buildings on the southern side of Lichfield St, between Colombo and Manchester streets, would have to come down, he said.

In Colombo St, buildings south of Tuam St were being demolished yesterday, while further north, demolition of a series of shops, including Sergios menswear and New Zealand Post, will start soon.

- The Press

Comments