Drone cameras capture bird's eye views of Christchurch quake damage

TheCommanderNZ/YouTube A birds eye view of some of the red zones in Christchurch, a haunting reminder of how much damage was done as a result of the 2011 earthquake

Cameras soaring through the skies of Christchurch are capturing the city in a new light.

Drone footage has captured a bird's eye view of the Christ Church Cathedral and the ruined homes above Sumner, showing the extensive damage they sustained during the quakes.

Cody Dowdle, of Canterbury Aerial Photography, uploaded the footage captured by his drone to You Tube last month.

He said he wanted to get a closer look at the damaged cathedral and was surprised by what he saw.

"I was surprised by how undamaged the other side of the cathedral was," he said.

"Considering how bad the frontage is, the rest of it is basically intact."

Dowdle, who is from Ashburton, has also taken his drone over Mt Hutt, the Ashburton Clocktower and the Timaru Port.

His footage follows others recently captured by drones, including last week's video of extensive quake damage sustained by the Catholic cathedral on Barbadoes St.

Dowdle is one of a number of drone operators in Canterbury swarming the skies with their contraptions.

He said he followed the law with his drone but not everyone did.

There are few regulations covering drone flying but the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is introducing rules to govern their use.

The CAA said it was receiving 50 inquiries about drones a week - up from about 20 at the start of last year.

Proposed new rules state drones should not fly higher than 120 metres, should only be flown during daytime and pilots should be able to see their drones at all times.

Pete Perrim, of the Southern UAV Enthusiasts, estimated there were about 200 active drone users in Canterbury.

His group started "with a hiss and a roar" last year but the limitations of cheaper drones meant it was hard to capture good quality footage for less than $1500, which was a barrier for new users.

He welcomed the new regulations, which would help legitimise his hobby.

"It's a bit like people's cars - 99 per cent of people use their cars safely but then there's 1 per cent who go crazy and cause all sorts of mayhem.

"Responsible users don't want to be tarred with the same brush."

Perrim said the new regulations were "common sense stuff" and easy to abide by.

Donovan Campbell, manager of Photo Warehouse in Christchurch, said the incoming restrictions had some people wary about investing in one.

"I think there's been a slight decline [in sales] recently because I believe there are rumours of licensing laws coming in like there are in the US," he said.

A Parrot AR Drone - the most popular on the consumer market - can be bought for less than $500 and can fly up to 50 metres in the air.

Pricier machines such as the DJI Phantom 2 drone, which Perrim and Dowdle use, can fly up to 500 metres and as fast as 54kmh.

Drones have been used by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority to assess quake damage in the Port Hills and police have been looking into using them to snap crime scenes from above.

Drones are also used by the Canterbury Coastguard to search for missing people.

- The Press