Earthquake stalls rebuild start JENNY KEOWN

DEAN KOZANIC DELAYED REBUILD: The north side of the Hotel Grand Chancellor as viewed this week from Manchester St, where demolition and temporary constructions are well underway. The city rebuild is not expected to start until the second half of next year.

New Zealand's biggest company, Fletcher Building, says the Government is not expecting the Canterbury rebuild to start until the second half of next year.

Fletcher saw its share price plunge 12.4 per cent by market close yesterday after it announced a major dip in its earnings forecast for the half-year.

Chief executive Jonathan Ling said further delays to the Canterbury rebuild had had a "very significant effect" on the company.

He said Treasury expected the rebuild wouldl not begin until the second half of next year.

Fletcher, the lead manager of the Canterbury rebuild, had expected Canterbury reconstruction to accelerate in the second half of 2012, but Sunday's 5.5 earthquake set back those plans.

The listed building giant expects net earnings of $149.4 million, 10 per cent below the $166m achieved at the same time the year before. But it believes the dip will be short-lived, with full 2012 financial year net earnings forecast to improve in the second half, though end up about the same as last year's $359m.

Ling rejected accusations by an analyst that the company should have informed the market earlier about the downgrade.

"In all fairness, the Australian market has declined quickly. The first quarter of this year is down on where we thought it would be."

Fletcher had forecast stronger earnings in the second half as the income from Australian-based Crane, which it bought in March 2010, comes fully on board.

BT Funds Management equities manager Paul Harrison said Australian institutional investors were flicking off the stock yesterday.

Fletcher had tried hard to build its offshore investor base, he said. The earnings downgrade presented a challenge for the company to maintain and boost its Australian shareholder base.

Fletcher's move surprised Harrison, who, along with other analysts, had toured the company's Crane facilities late last month, with no indication of a downgrade.

"Fletcher are normally good communicators, so this has come as a surprise to investors," he said.

Yesterday, investors' negative reaction to Fletcher's news had translated to other building-related stocks, he said, including Cavalier, whose share price closed down 5 per cent to $2.75.

Cavalier announced yesterday that sales of its broadloom carpets and carpet titles had dropped 20 per cent in the three months to September 30 compared with the corresponding period last year.

Morningstar analyst Nachiket Moghue said he had factored in a full-year estimate of $422m, 18 per cent lower than Fletcher's revised forecast.

Taking out the earnings from Fletcher's newly acquired Australian pipemaker business Crane, earnings would drop 20 per cent, he said. Fletcher believed there was a clear risk in Australia that residential and commercial construction activity would remain weak for the rest of 2012.

Australian construction had fallen to a low level as macro economic fears and higher interest rates delay home building and renovation plans.

The company expects North America and Europe markets to remain flat, while Asia would continue to grow.

- The Press

Comments