Earthquakes behind high distrust among Canterbury whanau

Robert Charles Maori Party co-leader Te Ururoa Flavell is accustomed to hearing from whanau who mistrust civil institutions.

Maori whanau in Canterbury have higher levels of distrust in public institutions than those in other areas because of the region's earthquakes, experts say.

The Families and Whanau Status Report 2015, released by the Social Policy Evaluation and Research Unit (Superu), analysed a Statistics New Zealand survey across seven whanau types and found a high level of distrust of people and key institutions nationally, especially in the education sector..

Superu did not have regional data on levels of distrust but Te Waipounamu District Maori Council chairwoman Melanie Mark-Shadbolt expected it to be higher in Christchurch.

"I think you would be a fool not to think that there was a correlation between distrust in the public sector and the earthquake response," she said.

"Insurance, Cera [Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority], city council and EQC [Earthquake Commission] ... when Christchurch answers that question that is what they are thinking of."

The closure and mergers of Canterbury schools since the earthquakes had led to lower trust in the education system, she said, but generally distrust was higher when whanau struggled to meet their needs.

"Whanau, whether Maori or non-Maori are struggling. When people struggle they begin to distrust [civil institutions]. That is what we are seeing in New Zealand society at the moment."

According to the report, couples aged under 50 had the highest level of distrust in police, courts, health and education systems. About 80 per cent of this whanau type also distrusted in the education system.

Only 14 percent of solo parents with at least one child under 18 had a high level of trust in other people.

This category also reported the highest levels of discrimination. Forty-five per cent felt discriminated against in schools and 34 per cent reported experiencing it in the past 12 months.

Katoa Ltd researcher Dr Fiona Cram said the report did not provide details, however, of what the respondents attributed discrimination to.

"So it's difficult to judge whether or not their experience was because they are Maori," she said.

Multi-whanau households had the highest level in trust in the education system and courts, at 28 per cent and 35 per cent respectively.

Older couples reported the highest levels of trust in police at 42 per cent.

The report said across all whanau types there was a strong sense of identity and belonging as Maori with about 80 per cent living with a family member who knows their iwi and 60 per cent knowing their ancestral marae.

"This is very favourable given that Maori are among the most urbanised indigenous people in the world, with at least 85 per cent living in urban areas."

Maori Party co-leader and Whanau Ora minister Te Ururoa Flavell said distrust in civil institutions was not unfamiliar to him.

"While not all experiences are similar, many whanau have talked to me about a certain level of mistrust of agencies.

"This has often arisen because of a number reasons, and typically the more complex the issues, the higher the degree of mistrust."

Frontline Whanau Ora workers were "well placed" to break down barriers when dealing with agencies, he said.

- Stuff