Earthquake Commission has spent $68m on travel

JOHN COWIE/FAIRFAX NZ Comparisons with the Earthquake Commission's spending on travel and accommodation.

The Earthquake Commission (EQC) has spent $68 million on travel-related costs since the September 2010 earthquake in Canterbury.

Documents released under the Official Information Act reveal EQC spent a total of $38m on accommodation and food for staff travelling in and out of Christchurch since September 2010, almost $20m on vehicles, $8.2m on airfares and $880,400 on taxis and parking costs.

Almost half of the money ($29m) was spent in 2010/11, when EQC had to increase staff numbers from 22 before the September 2010 quake, to more than 1000 in February 2011.

KIRK HARGREAVES/FAIRFAX NZ Labour EQC spokesman Clayton Cosgrove says EQC should relocate staff to Christchurch instead of wasting millions in travel costs.

The following year, travel costs kept running high at $23.4m but went down to a total of $15.6m for the past three years.

Labour EQC spokesman Clayton Cosgrove said EQC should have asked more staff to relocate to Christchurch or hired local people instead of having "an army of bureaucrats with their clipboards parachuted in from Wellington".

READ MORE:

* EQC and Cera PR budget 'going through the roof'

* Flight bill soars for Canty quake bureaucrats

It was understandable EQC spent so much money on travel costs in the initial stages of the recovery, he said, but Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee should have ensured the organisation transitioned from "a very expensive fly-in, fly-out option" in the past three years.

"I don't begrudge EQC for spending whatever it takes in the aftermath of the quakes but five years down the track you'd have to question why EQC is still spending millions on travel costs."

EQC chief executive Ian Simpson said EQC was a national organisation with offices in Wellington, Christchurch and Hamilton.

It set up new offices in Christchurch after the quakes, employing 1800 staff at its peak.

In December 2012, EQC had 596 staff in Christchurch, 391 in Wellington, 134 in Hamilton and 14 in other locations.

In June 2015, EQC had about 890 staff nationwide.

The travel costs provided covered all staff between EQC's three offices associated with its Canterbury response work.

"Some of the travel costs reflect the need of Canterbury-based staff to travel in the course of their work," Simpson said.

To date, EQC has settled about $8.8 billion in Canterbury claims.

The scale of the work meant EQC had to look beyond Canterbury for some of the expertise it required, especially given the strong demand for workers in Canterbury, he said.

The travel costs reflected the "urgent action taken to respond to the scale of devastation in Christchurch" between 2010 and 2012.

Over those two years, EQC completed 192,000 quake-damaged home assessments, 18,000 full-scope home repairs and 44,000 emergency repairs.

EQC had a travel and expenditure policy "to ensure that EQC is best practice and aligned with recommended government parameters", the organisation said.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee, who is also the minister responsible for EQC, did not respond to requests for comment on Monday.

- Stuff