Earthquake rubble mountain to get bigger

Dean Kozanic/Stuff.co.nz Earthquake demolition waste is processed at Burwood Resource Recovery Park.

The life of Burwood's earthquake rubble dump is likely to be extended, delaying construction of a recreation park at the site.

The slower than expected pace of demolition and increase in volume of material meant Christchurch's Burwood Resource Recovery Park was likely to operate longer than its planned September 2017 closure date, Transwaste Canterbury chairman Gill Cox said.

"We probably will have to go for an extension of the consent."

Dean Kozanic The life of Burwood's earthquake rubble dump is likely to be extended. The mound of demolition material being worked through is about 30 metres high, down from a 40-metre peak.

He was not sure how much longer the recovery park would need to stay open beyond 2017 but was planning on making a consent application to Environment Canterbury (ECan) later this year once more information on expected volumes was available.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee wrote to ECan late last year asking it to make changes to enable the continued use of the landfill for earthquake-related waste beyond September 2017. ECan endorsed this recommendation at a meeting in May.

"We're not talking years and years of extensions. The demolition will stop at some stage. It will come to an end," Cox said.

The recovery park was established on the site of the former Burwood landfill after the February 2011 quake to sort and dispose of demolition material.

It was expected to take 500,000 tonnes of material during its life but has already taken 650,000 tonnes, with more expected.

Cox said authorities had not yet been able to provide Transwaste with definite figures about how much demolition was still to be dumped but he was seeking that information from the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) and the Christchurch City Council.

It was difficult for those organisations to predict how many domestic buildings still had to be demolished.

Cox said It had been expected the demolition phase of Christchurch's recovery would take about two years but more than four years on buildings were still being demolished, including the former Camelot Hotel on Colombo St.

The landfill had the capacity to take the additional waste. The height of the 25-metre hill, created from the waste, would not increase but it was likely the hill would expand further outwards, Cox said.

"We have plenty of capacity to do that sort of thing."

Nearby resident Christine Clapp was disappointed the life of the landfill could be extended, especially since the community was looking forward to the recreation park being built.

She said she had gotten used to the noise from the trucks, which had lessened considerably since the speed limit was lowered on the landfill's access road and after she had double glazing installed.

Waitikiri Residents' Association chairman Rod Miller said he had no idea the operators of the landfill were considering extending its life.

"The last news we had was they hoped to finish well before the consent date expired."

Any extension to the landfill's life would delay plans to turn the 63 hectares of land into a recreation park, featuring nature trails and a mountain bike dual slalom area.

In September last year, the Burwood-Pegasus Community Board approved the redevelopment plan, which would see the dump rehabilitated into the 845-hectare Bottle Lake Forest, which is already popular with walkers, runners, mountain bikers and horse riders.

Transwaste Canterbury Limited is a joint venture between Waste Management and five Canterbury councils (Christchurch, Ashburton, Selwyn, Waimakariri and Hurunui).

- Stuff