Earthquake memorial 'says nothing about Christchurch'

KIRK HARGREAVES/The Press The design of the Christchurch earthquake memorial wall is revealed.

The winning design for the national Christchurch earthquake memorial looks like it could be situated "anywhere in the world", a Christchurch landscape architect says.



Di Lucas said Slovenian architect Grega Vezjak's riverside wall concept did not "say anything about the nature and culture of Christchurch".



"It's a generic interpretation... it doesn't say anything about the memory of the earthquake in this place."



She said the memorial failed to evoke the earthquake's galvanising effect on the Christchurch community.



"The purpose of the memorial is not just about those that died."



READ MORE:

* Opinion: Quake memorial can't please all

* Marble quake memorial 'ironic' - survivor

* Editorial: The names are vital for memorial

* Future of memorial chairs uncertain



Lucas did commend the layout, particularly the use of the south bank.



Her preference from the short-listed designs was the bronzed table and chairs.



"I thought a great big table with a big diversity of erratically arranged chairs was representative of the community coming together," she said.



"It would be put on many more Facebooks or whatever than a simple marble wall."

Jacky Bowring, a member of the evaluation panel which short-listed the 331 submissions, said the design's simplicity allowed for people to make their own associations.

"It's not only focussed on commemorating the lives lost, it's also about first responders, rescuers, and the experiences of those involved," she said.

"If you try and over-explain and over-describe those things, [a memorial] can become static and congested in terms of its meaning."



She encouraged people to spend time at the memorial site and look at plans, before criticising the design.

Meanwhile, the future of the 185 white chairs commemorating those killed in the Christchurch earthquake is being discussed.



Peter Majendie's installation has been the city's unofficial quake memorial since February 2012.



Majendie was meeting with stakeholders on Thursday evening to discuss the spatial and financial feasibility of casting the chairs in aluminium and setting them on a concrete base.

"The thing about the chairs is, how do I end it, what do I do with them?"

David Hallett Peter Majendie's poignant installation opposite the Transitional Cathedral on the corner of Cashel and Madras streets has been the city's unofficial earthquake memorial since February 2012.

Majendie said the installation had served a useful purpose in lieu of an official memorial.

"I think the chairs thing has been quite a tangible help to the grieving process."

Majendie did not agree with the rationale that the six-year delay in the memorial's construction gave victims' families time to grieve.

"Some families have said to me they think the national memorial is, well, for them now it's irrelevant. It's as it they've sort of missed that boat."

Majendie was not surprised the memorial's construction has been further delayed.

He described the chosen design as beautiful but clinical.

"It doesn't evoke memories of the earthquake, if you know what I mean."

He said the design's strong point was its simplicity and acknowledged its effect would be unknown until it was built.

"Hopefully it'll have a life of its own."



Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said it would not be wise to keep the chairs memorial.

"The site may be marked by, perhaps as they do in many other countries, some kind of plaque, but I think shutting sites off, if you had to do that around Christchurch you wouldn't have a lot of places where you can move on."

"There were a lot of people who lost their lives in cashel mall for example but yesterday we had a splendid gathering of people from chch to greet the prince and you gotta remember that a lot of these places, while you can recognise the loss of life, remain vibrant parts of the city and need to attract people who can engage in all sorts of activities."

- Stuff