Eclectic bunch turn out for earthquake recovery talk

It was an eclectic blend involving city councillors, scholars and even a former government employee but all were singing from the same song sheet when it came to handling the next phase of the city's rebuild.

The Government's draft transition recovery plan provided the centrepiece for a group of about 100 people, who sauntered in and out of a rolling six-hour conversation of the next phase in the city's rebuild at a Christchurch bar on Saturday.

The event, attended by Christchurch city councillors Raf Manji and Ali Jones, was organised by publishing company Freerange Press and the people behind the book, Once in a Life Time: City-building after Disaster in Christchurch.

Dubbed by some as one of the most important processes in recent time, the draft transitional plan lays out the power structure to be shared between the Christchurch City Council, the Government and other agencies over the next five years.

READ MORE:

* Who will run the Christchurch rebuild?

* Ex-mayor calls for council-led recovery

* Five reasons to have your say on Christchurch's recovery

* Council claws back rebuild power

* Christchurch councillors weigh in on anti-Brownlee blog

* Mike Yardley: City Council-led rebuild would be 'cataclysmic'

With submissions closing on Thursday, the proposed new recovery plan recommendations include three options for a new central city development agency to oversee crucial aspects of the rebuild.

Option one is a "crown-owned, fully autonomous Christchurch Development Agency"; option two is a "Christchurch Regeneration Authority established by the Crown and the Christchurch City Council"; and option three is a "Christchurch City Council-led recovery approach, with the Crown in close support".

The Government's proposed plan favoured option two but those at Saturday's gathering were clearly after a council-led recovery from now.

"Option three is where I'd sit at the moment, central Government has to have a play in here and I would expect it too. Taxpayers outside of Christchurch need to be cognisant of would they like their communities usurped in this way?" resident Blair Anderson said.

With his contract ending with the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority [Cera] in December, Ross Milne, whose work focussed on commercial building structures, is a man few would have guessed supported option three.

"I always believed, during my time at Cera, there was not enough engagement with the community. I felt Cera was making all the decisions and it was the city council and people on the sidelines watching," he said.

Brendon Harre, who has a keen interest in affordable housing, believed the CBD was failing, while the wider region was progressing well.

"I don't think Cera understands the CBD, I don't think Wellington [the Government] understands what's needed to be done. I think they have been more of a hindrance, and really the solutions have to come from the bottom up."

The council this week sent the Government a strong message with its draft plan submission, saying it no longer wanted to be a back-seat passenger in the city's recovery.

Manji said personally he sat "between" options two and three.

"It's time for the council . . . to take back the official reins but still working with the Crown to deliver what we both need to deliver.

"The key is for us is to design the right structures to make it easy for the Crown to exit whilst achieving their objects and at the same time giving people of Christchurch the sense they are now in control of the future direction of the city."

Architectural designer and PhD student Barnaby Bennett, one of the organisers of the Recovery Clinic, said he was encouraged the people had a say on the transitional plan but it was not entirely clear what was being proposed.

"The council . . . they are the authority that governs the place – and quite frankly we can vote them out if they don't perform."

As of Friday, Cera had received 70 submission on the draft transitional plan.

- Stuff