Editorial: Christchurch looking for speedier work on central-city recovery

Prime Minister John Key announces changes to management of Christchurch recovery.

OPINION:

The speeches on Thursday by Prime Minister John Key and Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee were full of fine and optimistic language. The city is at a critical point and requires a step-change in approach, the Prime Minister said. Regeneration, both said, must from now on be the focus of Christchurch governance. A new direction is needed to capitalise on the groundwork that has been laid.

The rhetoric was uplifting and hopeful. The plans that were outlined for a new body to take over from the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority and work closely with the Christchurch City Council to revitalise the rebuild look promising. But the clear implication from much of what Key and Brownlee said was that, as many people in Christchurch are well aware, the impetus of the central city recovery has sagged badly. While the Government insists it remains as committed to Christchurch as it ever was, its execution of its own promises, as illustrated by the proliferation of delayed projects, has not matched that commitment. The test of its latest set of proposals will not be in what they promise but rather on what they deliver.

The Government has adopted a recommendation of the earthquake transition advisory board to establish a new body for the next phase of the rebuild. It will be called Regenerate Christchurch and will be developed by the recovery minister, the mayor, the city council and officials. There was no hint of who might be on the board or how it will operate, although the Prime Minister did say that he saw it as functioning like an urban development authority. The detail will be telling.

Such a body was, as it happens, first proposed last year by Cr Raf Manji and the city council is itself in the process of setting one up. Manji saw it as a body to encourage and facilitate greater investment in Christchurch, something the central city obviously needs. This would appear to be more naturally a local function and it is to be hoped the Government and council can collaborate so they do not redundantly overlap.

One function of the new body will be to see that anchor projects and precincts are completed in a timely and effective manner, with, as the Prime Minister noted, greater commercial discipline. Although little has been said publicly on this aspect of the anchor projects, there has been a suspicion for some time that this element has been lacking around some of them. There have been reports that the difference between the way private enterprises function and the more leisurely timeframes adopted by Government departments has led to friction.

A focus of much of what the Prime Minister and Brownlee said yesterday was that the new Regenerate Christchurch entity and the council should work collaboratively on the rebuild. For that to work will, of course, require the council to be functioning at optimum capacity.

The Prime Minister said he hoped that the changes he had announced would speed things up in Christchurch. After the apparent lethargy of the last few months, Christchurch is with him on that.

- Stuff