Editorial: Recovery delays unfortunate

OPINION:

Everyone involved with big projects knows that they rarely go according to plan.

Budgets prove to be inaccurate, deadlines are missed, plans have to be changed. Such things are inevitable whenever a large number of separate components have to be completed and brought together. The larger the project, the more likely such problems will occur.

The rebuilding of Christchurch is the biggest task undertaken in New Zealand. According to estimates by the Treasury, the total cost in both private and public expenditure to repair the city is likely to be in the region of $40 billion. Within that overall figure there are many projects, public and private, worth upwards of $100 million. It is no surprise, therefore, that some of them will encounter difficulties on the way to completion.

Already, for instance, the ambitious scheme by property owner Antony Gough for a building to house bars, shops and offices where the the Strip on Oxford Tce once flourished has stalled. The project was one of the first to get under way in the inner city and was widely applauded when it was announced to great fanfare. A visible sign of substantial construction in a city whose dominant motif at that time was still demolition was heartening.

Regrettably, work was halted in the middle of last year. No visible work has been done on the structure since. The delay is a setback for both Gough and the city but it can be put down to the normal risks of commercial building development. Many people will be hoping that the difficulties that have brought about the delay can be worked out soon.

More worrying are the delays to the Avon River Precinct. This is one of the flagship anchor projects devised for the city by the Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU). Like Gough's building, it is a bold and attractive design and it won plaudits when it was announced. Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said when it was unveiled that it "would connect the people to the river and the river to the city in a way which will make it an outstanding and world-class attraction". Most of it is being paid for by the Government.

The river precinct was due to be finished at the end of this year. Now, however, CCDU has said it will not be completed until the middle of next year. This delay comes after hold-ups to construction of public spaces in the south frame and the development of some attractions for Cathedral Square, both now pushed into next year, as well as continuing uncertainty about the sports stadium, which has been pushed out to 2019.

All these delays will no doubt have sound reasons. It is important that, with the normal planning processes being bypassed and with little opportunity for public comment on them, the schemes are got right. But for commercial reasons and also for the good of general public morale it is important that projects are kept moving.

Tourism operators, for instance, have sold Christchurch to overseas visitors on the assumption that a good deal of the major projects would be completed at the times originally indicated and are embarrassed to have to explain to disappointed customers why they are not able to enjoy the promised world-class attractions.

The delays on public projects are not good for the mood of the city and could lead to a perception that important parts of the rebuild are stalling. As well as the delays, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority remains without a permanent head since the resignation of Roger Sutton. The Christchurch City Council still needs to sort out its finances. The projects the council is supposed to be part of remain uncertain.

Public bodies do not face the same constraints as private ones. They should be able to set a more positive example maintaining momentum in the recovery. It is true that a lot of work is being done on other major projects but the city cannot afford even the appearance of a slowdown, which multiple delays tend to give.

- The Press