Emotional rebuild explored in new papers PAUL GORMAN

How people have coped and rebuilt their lives since the Canterbury earthquakes is as important in the city's recovery as the restoration of buildings, a Christchurch psychologist says.

"The long-term measurement of recovery in Christchurch will be how the people come out of it and how lives are rebuilt, not just the quality of the buildings and the depth of the foundations," community psychologist and Christchurch Polytechnic Institute of Technology lecturer Libby Gawith says.

She is the author of one of three papers in a special issue released yesterday of the New Zealand Journal of Psychology covering the emotional and mental stresses and uncertainties Cantabrians have suffered from earthquakes since September 4, 2010.

The papers explain New Zealanders' judgments of earthquake risk before and after the quake, investigate how Christchurch communities have coped psychologically since the deadly February 22 quake and outline how uncertain scientific advice should be communicated during natural disasters.

Gawith writes that city residents have been "in different spaces".

Some had proved adaptable, while others were traumatised. Some had left the city or were in denial, and others were "trying to get some control over the event".

"Most people with difficulties arising from the earthquake do not want to be regarded as needy or desperate, but just want to be seen as people with 'extra needs' or similar.

"Psychologists have been valuable in journeying with people and identifying symptoms and signs of healthy and unhealthy behaviours and reactions to the disaster. Their practical ideas for children with anxiety and stress have been helpful."

Useful psychological messages had included:Realising most behaviours and responses were just usual reactions to an abnormal or difficult situation.

Taking "care of our minds, talk[ing] about what we witnessed and are worried about, or writ[ing] about it".

Replacing "horrible" images with positive ones, especially for children.

Admitting and sharing emotions.

Accepting everyone had different tipping points.

In another paper, researchers from Massey and Victoria universities, GNS Science and the University of Tasmania looked at communication with the public during the emergency management of disasters.

They said communication problems in past disasters had occurred due to "conflicting scientific advice from internal and external agencies, or due to the presence of a wide range of scientific advisory bodies and individuals. Experience ... has led to the practice of communicating scientific advice from one source.

"Communicating from one trusted source does not imply that the communication should be a consensus opinion, or that the communication does not include information about the associated uncertainty in the knowledge, data or outcome, and it is important to identify how best to communicate these aspects."

Psychologists had frequently debated whether stating uncertainties increased or decreased trust in the opinion, the paper said.

Communicating uncertainty could either enhance or reduce trust in the source.

"It has also been suggested that the provision of uncertainty can allow people to justify inaction or their own agenda, or to perceive the risk as being higher or lower than it actually is depending on their personal attitudes."

Percentages or probabilities could confuse members of the public with limited understanding of forecasting and should be used carefully and sparingly, they said.

The New Zealand Psychological Society said the journal would appeal to a wide audience, covering preparation for, survival of and recovery from a disaster that is affecting 10 per cent of the country's population.

- The Press

Comments