EQC and Cera PR budget 'going through the roof'

Cameron Burnell Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee says he is satisfied EQC and Cera's communication spending, staff levels and salaries are "appropriate given the issues they're dealing with".

The Government has created "an army of spin doctors" to defend its earthquake recovery organisations, a Labour MP says.

The Earthquake Commission (EQC) has spent more than $12 million on communication campaigns over the past five years - four times more than what the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) spent over the same period ($3m).

The figures do not include the organisations' public relations staff salaries, which amounted to about $4m for more than 40 staff in both organisations this year alone.

READ MORE: Cera PR budget doubles

EQC figures reveal the organisation appears to be paying its PR staff significantly more than Cera.

In 2013-14, EQC forked out about $2.3m in salaries for 21 staff - an average of $110,000 per staff member per year. In the same year, Cera had 18 staff and spent about $1.5m on salaries - an average of $85,000 per staff member per year.

Labour EQC spokesman Clayton Cosgrove said EQC had failed to provide high quality, accurate information to quake victims over the years, despite spending "going through the roof".

"The Government has created an army of spin doctors," he said.

"Everybody wants clear communication but the Government has not delivered that."

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said Labour and the media regularly demanded better communication from recovery authorities, yet complained about the spending.

"You're damned if you do and you're damned if you don't... You can't have it both ways."

He said he was satisfied EQC and Cera's communication spending, staff levels and salaries were "appropriate given the issues they're dealing with".

Canterbury Communities' Earthquake Recovery Network spokeswoman Leanne Curtis said EQC's communication with the community had vastly improved over the past 18 months.

"Before that, it was often radio silence," she said.

She put down the improvement to a "change of attitude" rather than increased spending.

"I don't think they've nailed it but they have finally figured out that they need to think about how people will process information."

For example, an "awful lot of thinking" had gone into EQC's letters to homeowners about excess payments, she said.

She thought those working on Canterbury's recovery "get paid stupid amounts of money" though.

Community volunteers often turned up to meetings with EQC and provided invaluable feedback, acting like consultants, she said.

"The real quality advice that [EQC] has had has come from the residents for free ... not from some overly paid person in Wellington."

An EQC spokesman said comparing EQC and Cera's communications budgets was "an artificial construct that is not meaningful".

EQC was a national organisation with responsibilities outside of Canterbury and offices in Wellington, Christchurch and Hamilton.



It responded to natural disasters in other parts of New Zealand, including the recent Cook Strait earthquake and the Northland floods, and had national public education roles on natural disaster risks.

EQC's communication spending was "a reflection of the information needs of its customers and stakeholders both nationally and in Canterbury".

EQC had 10 communication staff in Wellington and three in Christchurch, with additional capability provided by an external PR company.

In June 2015, EQC had about 890 staff in total.

Campaigns undertaken in the 2014-2015 year included a monthly half-page information section in Canterbury newspapers, North Island flood advertising in June 2015, and storm advertising in July 2014.

- Stuff