Ex-mayor Garry Moore leads group calling for council-led recovery

Stacy Squires 22072015. News Photo. Stacy Squires/Fairfax NZ. ex Christchurch Mayor Garry Moore ran a talk shop Mon 21st on submissions to the Cera transition draft proposals. PHOTO: Garry Moore (C beard) with Betty Chapman, Marty Scott and John Patterson

Former Christchurch Mayor Garry Moore is spearheading a group calling for a city council-led earthquake recovery.

Moore, a long-term mayor before Sir Bob Parker, and architectural designer Barnaby Bennett are among the founders of the Option 3+ group, which has attracted 649 members on Facebook within two weeks of its creation.

Moore said the group was about "capturing our city back" from "Wellington's hands".

050613 News Photo: taken from twitter Labour MP Lianne Dalziel , centre having coffee with Former Christchurch Mayor's Vicki Buck , left, and Garry moore. Dalziel is being touted to run for the Mayoralty in this years local body elections

It called for the recovery's control to be "returned to the people and communities that make up the city".

To help achieve this, members were encouraged to make public submissions on the Government's proposed new recovery plan in favour of a council-led recovery.

"We want to see the city council raise its game," he said.

Bennett, who recently made waves with an article calling for Gerry Brownlee to step down as Earthquake Recovery Minister, said submitting on the recovery plan was "probably the most important opportunity for people to have their say in several years".

Cantabrians had a "massive lack of confidence" in government rebuild authorities and needed to be empowered through a locally-led recovery, he said.

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) had received 70 submissions on the draft recovery plan as of Friday, a spokesman said.

The deadline to submit is July 30.

READ MORE:

* Five reasons to have your say on Christchurch's recovery

* Council claws back rebuild power

* Christchurch councillors weigh in on anti-Brownlee blog

* Mike Yardley: City Council-led rebuild would be 'cataclysmic'

The Government's Draft Transition Recovery Plan lays out the power structure that will be shared between the Christchurch City Council, the Government and other agencies over the next five years.

The plan came after a transition advisory board, chaired by former Prime Minister Dame Jenny Shipley, delivered a report to the Government on how to make the handover from Cera to council and other agencies.

The recommendations included three options for a new central city development agency that would oversee crucial aspects of the rebuild.

Option 1 was a "crown-owned, fully autonomous Christchurch Development Agency"; Option 2 was a "Christchurch Regeneration Authority established by the Crown and the Christchurch City Council"; and Option 3 was "a Christchurch City Council-led recovery approach, with the Crown in close support".

The Government's proposed plan favoured Option 2, but the Option 3+ group is lobbying for council to get full control of the agency.

The "+" called for the new development agency to include suburban communities such as Sumner, New Brighton and Lyttelton, rather than focussing solely on the CBD, Bennett said.

"Only with a council-led agency that has the authority, funding and processes to work with communities over all of Christchurch can we co-create the sustainable, inclusive and democratic city we all imagined in Share an Idea," the group description said.

Members of the Option 3+ group, as well as others from a range of backgrounds, including city councillor Raf Manji, public health specialist Lucy D'Aeth and filmmaker Gerard Smyth, will discuss the recovery this Saturday at Brick Farm on High St from 12 pm to 6pm.

People are encouraged to pop in and chat about Christchurch's recovery and the Government's Draft Transition Recovery Plan.

You can comment on the draft transition recovery plan through an online form, or by emailing info@cera.govt.nz. You can also go to Cera's Facebook page.

Feedback is due by 5pm on Thursday, July 30.

- Stuff