Expats funnel $6 million into Christchurch rebuild

Dean Kozanic Eric Tracey, right, is shown the rebuilt Theatre Royal by Neil Cox.

An offshore trust set up by expats is set to close after funelling over $6 million into the Christchurch rebuild.

Eric Tracey, chairman of the Christchurch Earthquake Appeal Trust UK, is in town today touring projects the trust has provided funding for.

The trust, set up by the New Zealand High Commission in London and other expats after the February quake, has raised about $3m from individual donors and $3 from corporate sponsors.

Originally from Auckland, the 2014 London New Zealand Society's New Zealander of the Year lives in London but owns a house on Waiheke Island and returns once a year for a holiday.

"I was walking along Palm Beach one morning [after the quake] thinking it's going to feel really weird this time going back to England, going back to not 24/7 hearing, thinking, talking only about the earthquake. Then I got a phone call from the British High Comissioner."

This is Tracey's third visit to Christchurch to oversee progress, and only his first in the driver's seat. Founding chairman Sir John Buchanan recommended him for the top spot after he became unwell about six months ago.

Tracey spent today visiting the Champion Centre, Aviva, the Christchurch Arts Centre and the Isaac Theatre Royal - all of which were given cash injections by the trust.

Allotments of between $50,000 and $100,000 had been given out to projects that "covered the entire spectrum".

"We decided we would favour projects that helped put smiles on people's faces, rather than throwing it all into one big building.

"This is fantastic to see. A year ago I was in a hard hat in a high-vis jacket and you could barely envisage what it was going to look like."

Aside from a one-off $4m donation for the Christ Church Cathedral project from a British citizen, the trust had distributed all their funding and would now likely close.

"It was a chance to do something Kiwi," Tracey said.

"We've had a good life, we've been well rewarded for it and we've got to give something back."

- The Press