Five-year task for Christchurch earthquake recovery agency

Daniel Tobin

Prime Minister John Key announces a new government department to manage the rebuilding of Canterbury.

Relevant offers

A new stand alone government department with widespread powers has been created to manage the rebuilding of Canterbury following the devastating February 22 earthquake.

Prime Minister John Key said the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA) would operate for five years, with its operations reviewed annually.

The interim chief executive would be deputy State Services Commissioner John Ombler.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said the authority would coordinate the recovery effort and have the power to relax, suspend or extend laws and regulations to allow faster decision making on key aspects of the rebuild.

''These are essentially reserve powers and there will be checks and balances on the use of these powers so the public can have confidence they are being used wisely and with restraint,'' Brownlee said.

Enabling legislation setting up the authority would be before Parliament in the next few weeks.

Brownlee said the authority was modelled on lessons learned from international experience and the response to Canterbury's September 4 earthquake.

It would work with local councils and communities, the residents of greater Christchurch, Ngai Tahu and the non-government sector and business interests.

''As Minister for Canterbury Earthquake Recovery I look forward to working with all these parties to make the rebuilding of Christchurch, and the wider region, something we can all be very proud of.''

The authority would itself be overseen by an independent four person review panel which would be chaired by a retired High Court judge and assess all legislative and regulatory changes CERA sought to make.

A cross-party forum of Canterbury MPs would be set up to provide advice and a forum of Canterbury community leaders would provide input on issues important to locals.

There would be appeal rights against decisions made by the authority, with hearings heard swiftly by the High Court.

The authority would also be subject to the Official Information Act.

Brownlee said many of powers in the proposed legislation were based on those put in place in Queensland to deal with the Australian state's devastating floods in January.

These included the power to acquire, hold, deal with and dispose of property and Brownlee's ability to call-in the powers and functions of a local authority or council organisation.

Brownlee said it was important that the public have confidence that the powers would be used judiciously.

''The review panel will provide the valuable function of independent scrutiny so the public can have confidence that CERA is carrying out its role appropriately.''

''A key early step will be the appointment of around 20 individuals to the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Community Forum. This cross section of the many interest groups across the region will be an important conduit for the community to express what's important to them in developing the plan for rebuilding Canterbury.''

Brownlee hoped to announce the community forum's membership within three weeks.

The authority would be based in Christchurch and partly staffed by secondees from government ministries directly involved in the recovery process.

It was hoped to appoint a permanent chief executive within five weeks.

Labour earthquake recovery spokesman Clayton Cosgrove said the Opposition was prepared to give the authority a go, but questioned how much consultation there had been with locals.

There were also concerns that the authority could mire the rebuilding effort in bureaucracy.

''We are worried that the Government has not consulted widely. It says it has but, if that's the case, it is remarkable that despite working closely with Cantabrians on the ground every day since the February quake happened, I have still found no one who has been consulted.

''My fear remains that the new authority will unleash hundreds of Wellington bureaucrats with clipboards and pens tripping over their own red tape as they seek to impose their solutions on Canterbury people who already know what has to be done.

''The last thing Canterbury people need is more bureaucrats stifling innovative ideas about the rebuild. Canterbury's local authorities can't do it on their own without support, but Canterbury people are entitled to say what sort of city and province they want. The Government has not listened to Canterbury people for the past six months, but they are the ones who know what needs to be done.''

SPECIAL MEASURES EASED

Yesterday John Key revealed plans to scale back and then terminate special financial support to workers and businesses during the next two months.

"Essentially the message is that we're wanting businesses and employees to use this time now to assess their likely future," Key said.

"This is a period of time that is an interim step as people regroup after the earthquake but also acknowledging that they do need to make plans for their future now."

The earthquake support subsidies for employers and workers would be extended until April 18, but would fall away in fortnightly increments after that.

For employers, the current payment of $500 per week for each fulltime employee would drop back to $375 a week, then down to $250 a week two weeks later. For employees, the job loss cover payment, which has been taken up by 6700 people, would be scrapped and replaced with a top-up payment for those still out of work.

It would be paid out at $50 per week for a single person, $80 for a couple without children and an additional $10 per week for each child, up to a maximum of $110 a week.

Key said that so far, $153 million had been spent on the earthquake support package. The cost under the extended scheme was expected to increase by a further $91m.

He had previously come under pressure over the appointment of the interim chief executive to lead the new recovery agency.

Customs boss Martyn Dunne had been expected to take the job for about two months.

- MARTIN KAY and JOHN HARTEVELT/Stuff