Flood risk grows as ground slumps DAVID WILLIAMS

World renowned climate scientist Dr. James Hansen gave a public lecturer at the University of Canterbury.

While full of predictions that coal-burning is going to send civilisation to its doom, United States climate scientist James Hansen has a warning for Christchurch's leaders.

It is "very important" that a city hit by two major earthquakes, with subsidence of up to a metre in places, thinks about sea level rise when rebuilding, he says.

Sea level rise is "non-linear", he explains, in that it doesn't occur at the same rate, year after year. Rather, it can accelerate rapidly if tipping points are reached.

As outlined by the Intergovermental Panel on Climate Change in 2007, if nothing is done to tackle rising greenhouse gas emissions - if we carry on "business as usual" - then global temperatures will soar and sea level will surge, putting many species at risk.

Hansen says a multi-metre sea level rise is possible this century if greenhouse gas emissions, caused by things such as coal-fired power plants, vehicle engines and agriculture, are not reduced.

That might eventually see a return to a hotter world that occurred more than 30 million years ago. It had no ice sheets and the sea level was 75 metres higher.

"In my opinion, there's no way that the West Antarctic ice sheet could be stable for a full century, if we follow business as usual," Hansen says.

"It's going to cause summer melt on the surface of parts of the West Antarctic ice sheet and it's going to melt the ice shelves."

A little background. Scientists say greenhouse gases being pumped into the atmosphere by humans are trapping the sun's heat, causing an "energy imbalance". (There are other complicating factors, including large- scale deforestation of carbon-sucking plants, a reduction in ice and snow, and air pollution.)

The extra energy warms the oceans and increases atmospheric temperatures. Hansen says this extra heat is accelerating melting of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets and mid-latitude glaciers, which causes the sea to rise.

Some experts, Hansen included, are picking that once the ice sheet melt reaches a certain point, it will rapidly disintegrate and inundate low-lying areas - home to hundreds of millions of people.

The rate of sea level rise is being debated within the scientific community. The global mean sea level has risen an average of 1.8mm a year between 1961 to 2003. Less reliable satellite data suggests an average rise of 3.2mm/year between 1993-2007. However, a future rise, of some sort, is seen as incontrovertible fact.

Hansen, 70, is the adjunct professor of earth and environmental sciences at Columbia University and the director of Nasa's Goddard Institute for Space Studies. He was one of the first scientists to raise the issue of global warming, in a now famous testimony to the US Congress in 1988. In his latter years he has become something of an activist, being arrested at a mine protest in 2009.

During his whirlwind 10-day tour of New Zealand, he warned that unless we leave the world's coal reserves in the ground, we'll lock in a hotter future.

The global urgency of his message takes on more impetus with the news this week that carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere have hit a new peak, of 394.97 parts per million. Also, the International Energy Agency says energy generation's carbon-dioxide emissions in 2010 were the highest in history.

But the sea-level implications of his predictions are particularly significant for low-lying, quake-hit Christchurch.

The city has two rivers snaking through it and much of it is drained swamp land. As it is, the city's main surveying marker - a stone in the foyer of the city's broken Anglican cathedral, 8.5 kilometres from the beach - is barely five metres above the high tide line.

Some might say, haven't we been through enough already?

After two major earthquakes and a cordoned-off central city, we'd probably rather stick our heads in the silt and get on with the rebuild.

But while sea level rise might have been viewed as fringe thinking 20 years ago, the science has firmed. Plus, circumstances appear to have taken over.

Tidal flooding from the Lower Styx River has swamped some Brooklands properties twice a day since the February earthquake.

Last month high-tide flooding hit Christchurch's river suburbs and residents are anxiously waiting to see if it's a wet winter.

GNS Science geophysicist John Beavan, of Wellington, has been surveying post-quake Christchurch.

He confirms that isolated areas, rather than whole suburbs, have dropped by up to a metre.

Modelling done after the quake - quite a bit of which has been verified by surveying - showed that the Avon- Heathcote Estuary and part of the Port Hills has risen by "several tens of centimetres". Meanwhile, land to the north of the Estuary, such as Bexley, has gone down by maybe 10cm.

Subsidence because of liquefaction is on top of that.

"Obviously that's going to have a big effect on what will happen with sea level rise in that region, particularly in the area north of the Estuary where the land has gone down," Beavan says.

"There's potentially a serious problem there. It needs to be evaluated properly . . . before actually deciding what should be done about it."

If the upper range of estimates from Hansen and others is to be believed, the sea may be lapping at the altar of Christ Church Cathedral by 2100.

But not everyone agrees.

Professor John Hannah, a former dean of the National Surveying School at University of Otago, has been at the forefront of New Zealand's research into sea level rise for 20 years.

He says New Zealand tide gauges are showing a 1.7mm average sea level rise over the last 100 years.

"The tide gauges are not showing acceleration at this stage," he says.

"There would have to be a dramatic change to get [a rise of] more than a metre in the next 90 years."

Hannah concedes there have been times in geological history when sea level globally, and in New Zealand, rose by 10mm a year and higher, meaning a metre of sea level rise this century is possible.

But at the moment that's just not happening, he says.

"If we're not seeing it at this moment and we haven't been seeing it for the last 20 to 30 years, then I think the probability of getting anything close to a metre by the turn of the century is very unlikely."

Hannah might pooh-pooh Hansen's predictions.

But he says it is still prudent for authorities to review regulations for minimum floor heights.

Ministry for the Environment guidelines say councils need to consider sea-level rise of 0.5m to 2100 as a base value, and the consequences of a 0.8m rise, in their long-term planning.

Hannah says that's sound advice.

"They would want to consider whether or not 0.5m to 0.8m would create significant problems for Christchurch, and I suspect it would in some areas," he says.

"If you're already getting issues then they're not going to get any better."

Beaven says the issue is imminent for Christchurch, where land levels have dropped.

"I think we do have to worry about it right now. When you build things they're going to last for decades, so you're planning for what might happen."

Sea level rise briefly surfaced at last month's city council-run ideas expo. High-profile University of Canterbury geologist Mark Quigley was told his ideas about repopulating most of the eastern suburbs did not fit with his acknowledgement that the sea would rise.

Quigley, who lives in the east, argued people still wanted to live by the oceans.

"It is important we still give people in the east options to live. A lot of them don't want to move from the east. We've got to be compassionate in that regard."

The authorities will know more soon.

Land Information New Zealand's chief geodesist Graeme Blick says surveying data is expected to go to the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) by the end of June.

Cera's interim chief executive, John Ombler, says the government department is pulling together complex and technical information from more than a dozen public and private groups to help build a single scientific picture.

"Subsidence data and scientific forecasts about sea levels are part of the fuller picture of technical information that will inform thinking and decision- making in terms of the worst affected suburbs."

For some, however, lifting house floor levels and abandoning small pockets of the eastern suburbs isn't much of a response.

Former Christchurch man Nigel Williams, a traffic planner who now lives in Auckland, follows Hansen's work closely and is developing a retirement property, with solar panels, well out of harm's way.

Williams, 64, has a blog called The 100 Metre Line, which urges people to move to higher ground while they still can.

He says 10 metres above mean sea level passes through St Andrew's College, in Papanui, and parts of Halswell.

"If by 2050 there has been half a metre of sea level rise, we'll be up to our arses by 2100," he says.

"I'd move to Geraldine."

- The Press

Comments