Foundation damage 'not quake' owners told But owners say insurers trying to 'weasel out' MARTIN VAN BEYNEN

Martin van Beynen COURT ACTION: Cameron and Suzanne Kelly want $590,000 for the rebuild of their home.

Insurers whittled down an agreed rebuild of a Burwood house to a $50,000 repair, the High Court was told today.

Cameron and Suzanne Kelly are, through their company, claiming about $590,000 for the rebuild of their house which, they say, is uneconomic to repair.

The main issue in the case is whether the Earthquake Commission (EQC) and the couple's insurer, Southern Response (SR), are obliged to fix the foundations of the 100-year-old house, bordering the Christchurch red zone.

EQC and SR are arguing the damage to the basalt pile foundations of the house pre-existed the earthquakes starting on February 22, 2011.

The Kellys' lawyer Grant Shand said the T3 section on which the house was built underwent significant liquefaction during the earthquakes and the house was badly damaged with bumps and humps in the floors and roof.

Both insurers had initially concluded the house needed to be lifted and the foundation rebuilt but this had changed to a jack-and-pack strategy over the last four years.

Then this month the insurers had taken the new position the earthquakes had not produced the foundation damage, despite their own experts agreeing, in past assessments, the damage was earthquake-related.

Shand said a registered surveyor had found the house had dropped 360mm, a drop even greater than the road outside the house which had settled by about 250mm. The floors of the house had various drops of around 88mm and the surveyor had also found lateral stretching of 160mm.

The insurers were trying to ''weasel out'' of their obligations and would have to prove Suzanne Kelly and 11 other witnesses, who noticed damage to the house after the earthquakes, were wrong or lying.

''They now want to discredit their earlier material,'' he said. ''The defendants would have you believe that their experts have it wrong.''

Shand said the Kellys' own expert advice showed a jack-and-pack strategy was inappropriate for a section with liquefaction and lateral spreading damage.

The Kellys, he said, had lived in rented accommodation since February 2011 and had had nothing from EQC or SR.

''They have come here to try to get a fair outcome. It's all or nothing. It's $53,000 or $590,000,'' he said.

The insurers had no right after four years to do any physical repairs on the house, he said.

Bruce Scott, in opening for EQC, said his client maintained the floor levels had not changed in the earthquakes. He said the initial claim had been for an amount of $1 million for the 210 sqm house.

Shand had also brought the case under the wrong branch of law and should therefore fail.

EQC worked under a statutory scheme and its decisions had to be challenged by judicial review, not private law.

- The Press

Comments