Future of quake-hit Inland Revenue Building uncertain

John Kirk-Anderson Former Inland Revenue Building, corner Madras and Cashel Streets.

A former Inland Revenue Department building in the central city would best be converted into commercial or office space, the developer Simon Henry says.

The Christchurch Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) and its Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) have been considering saving the eight-storey building but no decision has been reached.

The 14,000-square-metre structure cost $50 million to build and was completed in 2007.

Henry has owned the site since 1993 and built the multimillion-dollar complex to replace one destroyed in a fire in 2005.

Early in 2013 Henry talked of repairing the earthquake-hit building and putting it on seismic shock absorbers at a cost of $7 million to $15m.

Henry, of Rapaki Property Group, this week said he could possibly take a long-term lease on the former Inland Revenue building from the Crown, and was willing to make multimillion-dollar repairs.

His group could then lease it back into the Christchurch office market though that market was "rapidly becoming overbuilt . . . interestingly Christchurch is likely to have New Zealand's highest office vacancy rates by the end of this year".

"We're [still involved] in low-level or casual discussion with the Crown about leasing it back and turning it into office space. I don't think it fits in with their big plans for the city, though I predict in time it will."

Henry said the property would not be suitable for apartments or a hotel, because the southern side lacked natural light. He noted social media discussion on the subject.

"Let me say it would make a horrible hotel, it's too deep . . . when you think about good residential buildings, whether they be hotels or apartments, natural light is the thing you look for.

"Christchurch is set in the deep south therefore no-one wants to face south, it's a bit different if you're in Hawaii, of course."

The Cashel St building and its neighbouring Pavilion property were bought by the Crown as part of the eastern frame but Cera/ CCDU has not confirmed their fate.

A Cera spokesman said the Crown was still to appoint a developer for the east frame. "Once it does, the parties can work through what the options are and what is feasible in regard to potential uses for the Inland Revenue building," he said.

In February last year, Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee opened expressions of interest for development partners in the eastern frame.

Fletcher Building is understood to be the frontrunner.

- The Press