Gerry Brownlee the centrefold in cafe C1 Espresso's new menu

Supplied Supplied Supplied Supplied The artistic impression of Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee offers an array of outfit options, including Darth Vader. The artistic impression of Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee has an array of outfit options, including astronaut. The artistic impression of Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee has an array of outfit options, including bathroom attire and airline pilot. The artistic impression of Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee has an array of outfit options, including Disney princess. 1 of 4 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

MP Gerry Brownlee is the scantily-clad centrefold in a Christchurch cafe's new menu.

C1 Espresso has immortalised the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister as a paper doll in a 24-page magazine-style menu launched on Wednesday.

The 'Dress Up Gerry' lift-out boasts a range of sartorial options, including Disney princess, astronaut and Darth Vader costumes.



"It's satirical, I guess. That's our thing," owner Sam Crofskey said.

Supplied Some of the dress-up options for the Gerry Brownlee figurines.

Each paper outfit comes with a related comment made by Brownlee over the last few years.

Under the page featuring a robe and slippers is Brownlee's February 2013 statement that: "There is simply no evidence of a housing crisis in Christchurch."

An airline pilot's outfit is accompanied by Brownlee's public apology for breaching security to skip a queue at Christchurch airport in July 2014.



"I just wasn't thinking ... I like queuing now," the Minister said.

READ MORE:

* Cafe's Gerry Brownlee menu a hit

* Park bench dedication to Gerry Brownlee

Darth Vader's costume goes with a line about TC3 residents who criticised the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) in September 2012.

"I'm sick of all these people carping and moaning," he said.

A pink princess outfit includes a comment by Brownlee about how it was only people who had time to "buggerise around on Facebook all day" that were involved in an anti-Cera campaign in September 2012, while an astronaut's outfit is printed alongside the Minister's comment in July 2011 that he was "pretty happy with the way things are going" with Christchurch's rebuild.

Brownlee - who is also MP for Ilam, Minister Responsible for the Earthquake Commission, Minister for Defence, and Leader of the House - has featured in the cafe's paraphernalia in the past.



From late 2013, a stylised depiction of Brownlee as a five-eyed monster graced C1 Espresso's menu for more than a year.

The cafe printed about 5000 of the menus because amused patrons kept pilfering them, Crofskey said.

Brownlee's image soon adorned the cafe's coffee cards and the balloons in their kids' packs.

At the time, Brownlee said he was aware of the menu but had not seen it. He quashed a suggestion he had banned his family from patronising the cafe.

He did not respond to requests for comment on the new menu this week.

The monster menu was replaced by a pop-up version earlier this year, showing Christchurch buildings before and after the quakes, but the design had an unintended effect, Crofskey said.

"It was too sad – it made people cry."

The cafe's magazine-style menu venture was born from an inability to decide on a single menu design from those submitted by talented staff members.

The final menu includes new seasonal food items and old favourites, as well as artwork, writing and colouring-in pages.

Crofskey said he had wanted to move away from Brownlee as a design theme, but the minister had so far proved irreplaceable.

"We thought of Bob Parker, but he's out – it's been too long since he left," Crofskey said.

"Gerry it is until we think of someone else."

- Stuff