Gerry Brownlee queries KordaMentha audit NICOLE MATHEWSON AND SARAH-JANE O'CONNOR

Opinion poll How should the council plug its financial black hole? Increase rates Ask the Government for more money Cut spending on roads Cut spending on community facilities eg pools Cut spending on capital projects eg cycleways Sell, or partially sell, assets All of the above None of the above Vote Result Relevant offers

The Government has expressed concerns about an independent financial report into the Christchurch City Council's financial position.

The KordaMentha report was commissioned following Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel's pre-election pledge to "open the books" on the council's finances and its findings are due to be released publicly at 4pm today.

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said the Crown had concerns about some of the assumptions made in the report and the accuracy of some of the data used.



"For those reasons on April 30 the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA) asked financial consultants Morrison Low to provide their independent assessment of how the council's financial position, as presented in the KordaMentha report, relates to the Crown's role in the rebuild," Brownlee said in a statement released this afternoon.



KordaMentha provided Morrison Low with access to the latest version of its report only yesterday, he said.

The Crown expected to receive Morrison Low's report in about two weeks and would "be in a position to respond after that".



"Constructive discussions have taken place between CERA, Treasury and council officials on drafts of the KordaMentha report in Wellington and Christchurch in recent weeks, and I had hoped the council and the government could have presented a joined up response to the final report.



"Releasing the report today raises many more questions than we are presently able to answer."

Brownlee said it should not be forgotten that the cost-sharing agreement for Christchurch's rebuild was approved by both the city council and Cabinet.



"As the government is not in a position to make a fully informed comment on the KordaMentha report it is disappointing the council has chosen to release it," he said.

Brownlee told reporters at Parliament this afternoon the Government and council were partners in a $3 billion-plus cost-sharing agreement to pay for a string of anchor projects as part of the city's rebuild.

Both parties, plus officials from Treasury, Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) and others, had agreed to look at the full costs and report back by the end of this year.

This agreement was reaffirmed at a meeting on April 30 and he was "a bit surprised'' the council had chosen to release its full report today.

Brownlee disputed the council's projected shortfall of more than $500m.

"We are talking about ratepayers stumping up for ... I'm frightened there could be money that may not need spending,'' he said.

It was very important the final costs were accurate "and I'm concerned they may not be''.

Brownlee said if he was a Christchurch ratepayer he would expect that the financial information released by the council to be accurate. "As a minister, I have concerns about the accuracy of some of that information.''

There was a "slim possibility'' the final shortfall could be close to the council's projections.

OPENING THE BOOKS

The KordaMentha report was commissioned following Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel's pre-election pledge to "open the books".

Initial findings, released in December, identified insurance as a big risk for the city and warned the costs of the rebuild could be higher than forecast.

KordaMentha also questioned the accuracy of some of the cost estimates contained in the Three Year Plan and how the council would meet operating costs for anchor projects such as the new metro sports centre.

KordaMentha is an advisory firm that specialises in insolvencies and corporate recovery.

The report was due in February, but was held up because of difficulties determining the costs of rebuilding Christchurch's quake-damaged roads and pipes.

Last week, the council revealed an almost $400m shortfall in the budget for horizontal infrastructure - the repair and rebuilding of roads and underground pipes.

However, Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said the actual cost of repair work would be $3 billion, not the council estimate of $3.4b.

The Cost Sharing Agreement dictates that costs for the horizontal infrastructure rebuilding programme are split between the Crown and the council on a 60-40 per cent basis. That means the council would need to find $160m of the $398m shortfall.

- The Press

Comments