Google images reveal quake impact on Chch SARAH-JANE O'CONNOR

Google

Google street view of Christchurch before and after the earthquake.

Google Maps users will now be able to turn back time to see what landmarks used to look like.

The New Zealand launch of the new feature was held in Christchurch today.

Communications Minister Amy Adams said the location was ideal because people found it hard to remember what Christchurch places "used to look like".

Google New Zealand public policy manager Ross Young said many people had asked for old street view images to be preserved and made publicly accessible.

''We know that the ability to see how a place looked has special significance for this community,'' he said.

Until now, when people viewed a street view image, they would only be shown the latest image. The new feature would allow people to see how a place used to look and how it has changed over time, Young said.

The feature is being rolled out gradually, so not all users will be able to see the "clock" icon that enables the timeline view. Young said the rollout should be complete by tonight, though not all areas would have comparison photos.

Launched in 2007, Google Street View uses cars with 360-degree cameras on top to capture panoramic photos which are linked to Google's mapping system. People can look up an address and see the buildings and surrounding landmarks.

Anthony Baxter, from Google's crisis response team, was among those who made sure a new satellite image was taken of Christchurch within days of the February 2011 earthquake.

He said the timeline images would show ''what Christchurch was and what it will be''.

''We are trying to capture the past of Christchurch,'' he said.

With parts of the city difficult to get a car into, Baxter said that was where ''fit young men'' like Matt Jenke came in.

Jenke carries a Google Trekker system, which allows him to take photos of areas that cars cannot access.

One of his jobs is to map the Great Walks - a series of eight walking tracks throughout New Zealand. Last year he mapped Abel Tasman's Heaphy Track.

The pack weighs about 20 kilograms and with the 15 cameras sticking up above his head, ''it's a little top-heavy,'' Jenke said.

It made it difficult while he was walking the Heaphy and had to carefully manoeuvre under low branches.

After the launch, Jenke took the Trekker to Re:Start mall where he caught the eye of children and tourists.

Dave and Sarah Nicholls, visiting from the United Kingdom, were surprised to see Jenke strolling through mall with his backpack camera.

They were visiting Christchurch for the first time, and said their visit had made the rebuild ''more relevant''.

Dave Nicholls said they would be able to look at the Google images over time and keep track of the changes in Christchurch as the rebuild progressed.

''You have a bit more of an interest,'' after seeing a place in person, he said.

Launched in 2007, Google Street View uses cars with roof-mounted 360-degree cameras that capture panoramic photos which are then linked to Google's mapping system.

People can look up an address and see the buildings and surrounding landmarks.

How to access historical Street View imagery on Google Maps

1) Use the new Google Maps for desktop at http://maps.google.co.nz

2) Enter the address of an area you'd like to explore and enter Street View mode

3) If a clock icon appears on the upper left-hand portion of the Street View image, click on it and toggle through time to see that same place in previous years or seasons

- The Press

Comments