Government needs to step back says Christchurch City Council

Dean Kozanic The Christchurch City Council is keen for more control in the city's rebuild after indifferent progress under the Government's leadership.

The Christchurch City Council has sent the Government a strong message it no longer wants to be a back-seat passenger in the city's recovery.

It says conversations about Christchurch's future must take place in Christchurch and that it is time it became a "policy maker rather than a policy taker".

In a carefully worded submission to the Government, it also says provision must be made for the council to resume responsibility for the regeneration of the central business district and that the Government should only use special legislative powers if the council requests it to do so.

"It is time for a transition back to local leadership and decision-making," the council's submission says.

The submission is the council's formal response to the draft transition recovery plan for Christchurch, which the Government put out for public consultation at the start of this month.

The plan outlined the Government's intention to introduce a new law later this year to replace the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act.

The new legislation, called the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Bill, would run for another five years from April 2016 and would formalise the transition of Cera's functions to other government agencies, local councils and Ngai Tahu. It would also establish a new commercial entity, Regenerate Christchurch, which would be responsible for the regeneration of the city.

Bi-lateral discussions are taking place between council and Crown officials about the structure and role of Regenerate Christchurch but both parties appear to accept a new approach is needed.

READ MORE:

* Ex-mayor calls for council-led recovery

* Five reasons to have your say on Christchurch's recovery

* Council claws back rebuild power

* Christchurch councillors weigh in on anti-Brownlee blog

* Mike Yardley: City Council-led rebuild would be 'cataclysmic'

In its submission, the council acknowledges investors and developers are dissatisfied with the lack of clarity over who is running the city – the council or the Christchurch Central Development Unit – and argues there needs to be a significant change in the pace and efficiency with which the Christchurch Central Recovery Plan's objectives, including the anchor projects, are delivered.

It points out that while some elements of the central city rebuild are progressing well, others have stalled and there has only been limited success in landing new international investment in the city.

"Collectively, the Crown and council must develop a more coherent and transparent governance and leadership environment that improves levels of confidence in the community and the private sector and ensures that there is a coherent strategy and implementation plan for the next recovery and regeneration phases," the submission says.

At a council meeting on Friday, in which councillors unanimously endorsed the submission, Mayor Lianne Dalziel said the council welcomed the Government's commitment to shift from centralised leadership to localised leadership and it was ready to take up the challenge it had thrown down.

The council wanted to develop not only a vibrant central city but also strong suburban centres to support the neighbourhoods that had been so badly hit by the earthquakes.

"What the Government is looking for is a council that is ready to step up and play its role. We are ready for that challenge," Dalziel said.

Cr Raf Manji said the council would continue to work closely with the Crown but it was time for it to take responsibility for the city's regeneration.

"What this is about is self-determination," Manji said.

Cr Ali Jones said Christchurch was ready to be a fully self-governed city again but cautioned there was still a lot of work to be done.

"There are still people who won't be able to understand the idea of transition. They won't be able to look too far ahead. There are people still trying to sort out their insurance issues, still trying to sort out EQC . . . still trying to sort out their lives. We have to continue to try and help them," she said.

- Stuff