Government wins business community backing for its rebuild transition plan

John Kirk-Anderson Tony Sewell of Ngai Tahu Property, left, Philip Carter, Carter Group, and Paul Crowe of Plenary Group, on the site of the planned Convention Centre.

Christchurch business leaders are applauding the Government's transition proposal where the Government retains a key role in the Christchurch rebuild over the next five years.

They were concerned that the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) winding up next April year would leave a vacuum of leadership in the city and the Government's commitment to anchor projects was flagging.

Ngai Tahu Property chief executive Tony Sewell said the proposal addressed every issue the business community had been concerned about.

He was happy with the Government's "complete commitment" to building the Convention Centre and the Metro Sports centre. Ngai Tahu is part of a consortium chosen as the Government's preferred partner to develop the Convention Centre.

Businesses had been concerned Government support for Christchurch was flagging "but it's not."

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee must report back to Cabinet by the end of August on the setting up of a new urban development authority, called Regenerate Christchurch, to lead the rebuild of the central city when Cera winds up in April.

The Christchurch City Council has set up its own development authority but the Government proposes now that its development authority should "integrate" with the council's.

The Christchurch City Council and the Government are expected to work together to set up Regenerate Christchurch and decide what its aims are, what its functions would be, what powers it had and who would pay for it.

"They have clearly set out that there is going to be a relationship between Government and council, " Sewell said.

Asked could the council and Government work together Sewell said "it's not a can, it's a must".

"The voters and the ratepayers won't tolerate a standoff." Sewell said.

Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce chief executive Peter Townsend said the proposal was sensible,offered a staged and predictable transition with the Government roles slowing decreasing and the council's increasing.

It relied on collaboration between central and local government, "which I applaud" and good strong commercial governance.

He expected the Government and the council to appoint the board members of Regenerate Christchurch.

The chamber had been "pushing strongly" for a governance model over the top of the rebuild projects and that was now going to happen.

Asked if Regenerate Christchurch was just the Christchurch Central Development Unit (within Cera) with a new name, Townsend disagreed with that and said the transition proposal was a step change with new legislation, new leadership and a new collaborative relationship between the Government and council.

He expected the government and council to appoint directors to the board.of the development authority. Those people would have strong commercial experience and project management backgrounds and tracks records.

The Government's proposal referred to some of Cera's powers expiring or going to councils and some role for Ngai Tahu.

Kaiwhakahaere of Te Rūnanga o Ngāi Tahu, the tribal council of Ngāi Tahu, Sir Mark Solomon said he was not aware of any detail on that.

He was on the advisory board, headed by Dame Jenny Shipley, that advised the Government. It called for a "demonstrable step-change in local leadership".

Sir Mark said the advisory board wanted to see control start to return to the city though the Government still needed to be involved.

Hawkins Construction executive director Jim Boult said he was delighted the government confirmed its commitment to the Convention Centre and Metro Sports centre.

He would like to see timeframes on those two. The Convention Centre was "the lump in the throat" of the central city developing, he said.

- Stuff.co.nz