Government taken to task over commitment to Christchurch

STACY SQUIRES/FAIRFAX NZ Christchurch City councillor Raf Manji.

Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel has hit out at embarrassing delays to the city's new convention centre, calling for Prime Minister John Key to step in.

Ongoing problems with the beleaguered building project would "damage Christchurch's reputation as a host city", Dalziel said, at a time when it desperately needed convention business and Key, as Minister of Tourism, needed to intervene to ensure it was ready on time.

The new low in council-Crown relations comes amid financial finger pointing over the Government's rebuild tax take. Two different figures emerged yesterday showing how much it is benefiting from Christchurch's earthquake recovery.

The Christchurch City Council-owned Canterbury Development Corporation (CDC) estimates the Government will receive $11 billion of taxes through the rebuild. The Government disagrees, putting the figure closer to $3b.

CDC's report, compiled with help from Deloitte in May 2014, but only released to The Press yesterday, said the Government would receive $7b, including GST revenue, from an initial $40b rebuild spend.

A good chunk of that money gets spent again and again by workers. That multiplier effect takes the $7b up to $11b, under the CDC analysis.

Treasury forecasts are much lower. It excludes GST from its estimate, which it said could be claimed back by rebuild entities.

It estimates extra tax from the rebuild of up to $3b. Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee backed that figure.

It estimated one third of the $40b was "displaced activity", spending which would have happened anyway, Treasury said.

Brownlee said the total rebuild cost had risen to $46b. The CDC tax estimate was wrong, he said, and overemphasised the GST take.

"We're also paying out $17b at the same time."

Christchurch city councillors have been at pains to point out that that $16.5b contribution is not all new spending either. About $7b came from the Earthquake Commission.

Cr Raf Manji said the CDC report showed that Government spending in Christchurch was not "all one way traffic".

"I think in the long run the Crown will come out on top fiscally, and we'll be the ones left with the debt."

The council had made major cuts to its capital projects, Manji said. It would probably spend about $6.5b of ratepayer money on the recovery.

In recent weeks concerns about delays on the new convention centre and metro sports facility, and repairs to the city's roads and pipes, have become pronounced.

Dalziel said a "bigger conversation" with Government was needed to get other faltering projects back on track.

Brownlee would not give a start date for the convention centre or metro sports builds.

"I don't like timelines to be given, and I think that people that give them set themselves up for a bit of a pummelling.

"When of course you do put out timelines then that also starts to diminish your ability to get a sharp price. So if you don't look so eager then it might also have some effect on what you eventually pay for things."

The Government last month pushed completion of the convention centre from 2017 to the end of 2018.

Brownlee on Thursday said it was unlikely to be ready by then. An 800-delegate convention had already been booked for November 2018.

In response to Dalziel's call to Key, Brownlee said the Government would not get "railroaded into spending hundreds of millions of dollars for a four-day conference".

"It's, I'm sorry, ridiculous for people to say 'we've got a booking for 2018 for a facility that doesn't exist, therefore you need to build it so we can have our four-day conference'.

"Wake up and smell the roses. This is not small change. They are big decisions so let's get them right."

Christchurch and Canterbury Convention Centre Bureau (CCCCB) manager Caroline Blanchfield said demand had never been higher for Christchurch as a host city but uncertainty on the centre's completion date would mean lost opportunities and hurt Christchurch's reputation.

The bureau bid for the Asia-Oceania Conference of Physical and Rehabilitation Medicine 18 months ago when the centre's finish date was 2017.

The Government endorsed the bid.

The bureau would talk to the conference's organising committee next week to see if it still wanted to bring the conference to an alternate, less optimal venue, Blanchfield said.

"We're disappointed that once again, there is no certainty."

To obtain conferences for the city, the bureau had to start the process five years ahead and this was only possible with a solid completion date, she said.

Brownlee said plans for the facility should be reconsidered in light of the Christchurch City Council's recent decision to save the Town Hall.

But Blanchfield said the Town Hall decision had "no relevance" in the convention centre's decision process.

"It's a civic space for graduations, concerts, there will be a meeting room but only for 80 people.

"It's a different kind of facility. One doesn't negate the other."

*An earlier version of this story said the CDC report was leaked to The Press, it was in fact released under the Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act.

- Stuff