Government 'holding back' on quake costs

Labour has questioned whether the Government is keeping money from Canterbury's earthquake recovery to improve this week's Budget.

The Government has already confirmed just under $1 billion of new spending will be included in Thursday's budget, as well as a small surplus.

However, Labour leader David Cunliffe said he understood the surplus would be achieved at the expense of Christchurch's rebuild.

'SMOKE AND MIRRORS'

"We have a concern that the smoke and mirrors Budget this year may in part be assisted by the Government retaining in its consolidated fund, at least temporarily, some money that had come from earthquake insurance that should be sent to Crown entities in sectors like education and health," he said.

The information had come from a "number of sources".

Cunliffe wanted the Government to assure the people of Christchurch that it was not holding back any money that should be sent to Crown entities for the earthquake rebuild.

"They may be able to take interest payments ... which may assist them to get to surplus, but that would be at the expense of those Crown entities in the Christchurch region which are desperate to get on with the rebuild.

"The interest on that money should be going to Christchurch, not to Wellington, and the costs are going up all the time on the rebuild."

Labour was also concerned that the Government had taken "tens of millions of dollars" of dividends out of Housing New Zealand

"We all know they're going to be really pressed to meet the costs of building houses in Christchurch and we think that's a really backwards step," Cunliffe said.

"We need every cent we can get into the housing rebuild."

Cunliffe said Labour's team would be going through Thursday's Budget "line by line, comma by comma, to make sure the prime minister's facts match the rhetoric".

"We just want to see the Government putting the people of Christchurch first.

LABOUR: CHRISTCHURCH 'TOP PRIORITY'

Labour MP Ruth Dyson last week questioned whether Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee's rejection of an independent report that looked into the Christchurch City Council's finances was related to the Budget.

The KordaMentha report, released last Wednesday, showed the council was facing a cost over-run of $534 million for earthquake repairs.

"If any predicted Budget surplus is based on false figures for the real cost of the Canterbury recovery, then people will see through it and expose it for the farce that it is," Dyson said.

Cunliffe said Labour was pleased the council had made the KordaMentha report public so agencies could understand the problem and work on solutions together "rather than have it swept under the carpet".

Labour would be making further announcements about its Canterbury policy after the Budget on Thursday, although a date had not yet been set, he said.

"We will be taking Christchurch very seriously indeed," Cunliffe said.

"It will be a top priority for us."

Prime Minister John Key rubbished Labour's claims, telling Radio New Zealand this morning that the surplus came as a result of huge effort and an efficient economy.

- The Press

Comments