Govt may raise rebuild contribution to $20b ALAN WOOD

The Government's contribution to the rebuild of Christchurch was likely to end up as high as $20 billion, Prime Minister John Key says.

Key said the Government's commitment to the reconstruction could increase by $5b, and that Christchurch people had turned a corner following the difficult times brought about from the 2010 and 2011 earthquakes.

''We've put about $15b of taxpayers money into the rebuild, but it will probably end up being the best part of $20b over time,'' Key said.

''So we have 9000 homes in the red zone, a huge amount of land in the CBD, 1200 buildings have been demolished. There's just been a huge amount of stuff, everything from the rebuild of roads over time and all your core infrastructure.''

The official Treasury estimate of the total rebuild cost is $40b, though this week Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce boss Peter Townsend said the total spend for the earthquake rebuild could grow to $50b, including extra spending for ''betterment".

Key said when the Government looked around the world at other sites of major natural disasters; Christchurch was tracking ''pretty well. That doesn't mean we can't speed up any faster.''

Asked about the general perception that the rebuild has been faster in the suburbs and outside the centre of the central business district, drawing activity out of the centre, the Prime Minister said that city anchor projects were starting to progress, with a further announcement at the arts precinct due today.

He made the comments while attending an announcement of an upgrade of Goodman Fielder's UHT milk processing factory in Christchurch.

''I think you've turned a bit of a corner in Christchurch, and my sense of the momentum is that people are starting to feel just that bit better ... you're starting to see a bit of momentum in the CBD,'' Key said.

There were roughly 200,000 homes in the wider Christchurch area and 91 per cent of them had been damaged in some way by the earthquakes, including some that had been written off, he said. The Government's commitment of $15-20b towards the rebuild included money. That amount includes funds paid out by insurer the Earthquake Commission.

Finance Minister Bill English recently estimated the taxpayers' contribution to the estimated $40b rebuild was $15.4b. A good chunk of that - about $7.3b, is related to Earthquake Commission costs and assets.

Key said in terms of the extra $27m investment by Goodman Fielder it was worth it. ''If you are ever wondering whether you're doing the right thing, think about these sorts of numbers. There's 1.35b people living in China, 740m of them live in cities and they're increasingly becoming middle income...

''Their demand for value added dairy-based products is huge, so as people get wealthier they buy protein, so they buy meat and they buy dairy and they want to buy quality.''

New Zealand had already done a free trade deal with China, and Key said he would be in Washington next week to help progress a hoped for free trade agreement with the United States. The Chinese agreement had led to an increase in two-way trade between the two countries of $8b six years ago, to $20b including $12b of exports into China by New Zealand.

- The Press