Greens want levy to rebuild Christchurch PALOMA MIGONE

Supplied Supplied Supplied The Greens’ Christchurch candidates, (L-R) Mojo Mathers, Kennedy Graham, John Kelcher, David Moorhouse, take their earthquake recovery policy to the beach. Kennedy Graham and the artist Peter Donnelly as the work takes shape. The completed work. 0 of 0 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

The Green Party wants a fund, paid for by an earthquake levy, to rebuild earthquake-hit Christchurch, co-leader Russel Norman says.

The Greens announced their earthquake recovery policy today, reiterating a proposal to introduce a nationwide earthquake levy to pay for the Christchurch rebuild, which the Government had already ruled out.

"The Green Party is the only party proposing a dedicated revenue stream that will be ring-fenced and used exclusively for the rebuild of Christchurch," Norman said.

"We consider that the fastest, fairest, and most economically sensible way to rebuild the livelihoods of those in Christchurch is to introduce a temporary earthquake levy on those who can most afford it.

"The people of Christchurch need assurance that all of New Zealand is backing the rebuild of their city."

The 1.5 per cent levy would apply to income between $48,001 and $70,000, and 3 per cent on income above $70,000.

This would mean those earning $50,000 a year would pay an additional 58 cents per week, people earning $70,000 per year would pay an additional $6.33 per week, while people on $100,000 would pay an additional $23.59 per week

Norman said the Government was borrowing for the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Fund and the Earthquake Kiwi Bond, as of October 11, had only raised $13 million.

"The Government's option of an earthquake bond offer has so far raised 0.2 percent of the $5.5 billion required from the Crown to pay for the Christchurch rebuild."

But the levy would cover the costs over five years, he said.

"It would save tax payers more than $660 million dollars in interest payments over five years.

"A levy is the smartest funding mechanism for rebuilding Christchurch. The dedicated levy ensures the rebuild isn't traded off against other spending priorities if the Government's fiscal position comes under more pressure," Norman said.

Comments