'Hands off our square' says Christchurch

Kirk Hargreaves Fierce reaction: Debate still rages over the future of Victoria Square's proposed post-quakes redevelopment.

In a city littered with empty, forlorn sites and missing landmarks, Victoria Square stands out.

❏ Victoria Square plan falls short

❏ Cera sees sense over Victoria Square revamp

It has survived the earthquakes largely untouched, yet the Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) has costly plans to redesign it.

It wants to make the square more event-friendly and bring to the fore its rich history as a site of early trading between European settlers and Ngai Tahu.

It says its design – which involves moving the 1950s Bowker Fountain 10-metres, shifting the Queen Victoria Statue a short distance and relocating the statue of Captain Cook so more room can be opened up for events and markets – better reflects the character that makes the area special.

It is struggling to sell its concept to the public but why?

Victoria Square is, after all, no stranger to change. Over the course of the past 100 years, the Queen Victoria and Captain Cook statues have been moved a number of times and a road through the square has been removed altogether.

Each change has been accompanied by controversy but since the last revamp 26 years ago, Victoria Square has been held up as in icon of the Garden City and thousands of visitors have paraded along its curvaceous paths.

Christchurch Civic Trust chairman Neil Roberts says since its redesign in 1989, Victoria Square has become part of Christchurch's identity. It is, he argues, an internationally renowned civic space that does not need to be disturbed. Making changes to its design now, before it is clear how the city is going to work, is "back to front".

"In 25 years time, there may in fact need to be some modification but why spend $7m of taxpayers' money to play around with it in the hope it is going to work. It is just not worth it," Roberts says.

He breathed a sigh of relief when Associate Earthquake Recovery Minister Nicky Wagner announced on Sunday the CCDU was going to push "pause" on the project until the public had been given a chance to comment on the design, but he is cautious about the outcome.

"We just hope they are doing [the consultation] in good faith and they are not doing it as a gesture to say 'oh well, we consulted with the public but we've now decided to proceed as before'."

Shirley resident Elizabeth Winkworth has been among those voicing opposition to the planned changes.

She believes the outcry reflects the frustration people are feeling over the loss of the city's heritage.

"People have had enough of seeing their treasured buildings and treasured places destroyed. They can't see any damage to Victoria Square, so they see no reason to change it.

"People in this city are still very much on the edge as far as their mental health is concerned. There is still huge anxiety about where their beloved city has gone and how little of it is going to be left."

Deputy Mayor Vicki Buck has voiced her opposition to the proposed redesign of Victoria Square, going as far as to tell CCDU she is willing to lie in front of the bulldozers to stop it.

"I don't think most people want it changed and the overwhelming reason for that is it looks and feels like the Victoria Square we know and love," Buck says.

"When you stand in Victoria Square you get this lovely sense of 'I know where I am'. In this city that is really important."

. . the mind maps or the mental maps people have of the city have disappeared but Victoria Square looks complete. There is a very strong emotional attachment to it.

In the 1980s, Ann Lewis was a member of the Protect Victoria Square Society that campaigned against the construction of a proposed 167-metre tourist tower. Now, 81, she says she is horrified by what the CCDU is proposing.

Lewis says Victoria Square is an "absolutely beautiful part of Christchurch" and already has everything it needs to be a place where people can enjoy themselves.

Places Canterbury chairman Mark Gerrard describes Victoria Square as a "green refuge in a CBD that is still gray and earthquake-affected" and is determined to stop CCDU tinkering with it.

"It is a fantastic space. It is really well designed and executed. It has now reached maturity after 25 years as to how it was envisaged and the public love it. It is also a piece of Christchurch pre-quake that is intact," says Gerrard.

While Victoria Square may look relatively undamaged, CCDU director Warwick Isaacs says there are some practical considerations driving the proposed redesign.

"There is some slumping of the ground near the river ... that needs to be addressed, as well as some damage to surrounding streetscapes that will need addressing. The removal of silt and ecological improvements to the river itself address an important need for Christchurch's natural environment," Isaacs says.

"Whatever the design of [Victoria] Square, it will need to link up effectively with the rest of the Avon River precinct, including the new promenade."

- The Press