Here for the Christchurch rebuild, living in a van

JOHN KIRK-ANDERSON/stuff.co.nz Matua Papuni lives in his van under a friend's carport.

While Matua Papuni methodically sweeps the Christchurch car port where he lives in his van, he mutters to himself.



It is "positive self talk".



It stops him from picking up the bottle again to quell the despair of living in the broken down van.



"I have to be careful . . . people must think I'm nuts."



When his drainlaying job finished in Hamilton, Papuni heard the rebuild was the place to be.



Full of jobs and money, the adverts said.



The 50-year-old has regretted moving ever since.



READ MORE:

* 'I've had enough' - Canterbury caravan mum

* Housing recovery neglects the poor

* Christchurch quake mums sleeping in chairs, dining rooms

* 'I think about suicide everyday' - Christchurch shed couple



Papuni has lived in car port for a year. Before that, a shed on Riccarton Rd that was so small he slept sitting up.



It has been hell.



"It's not as easy as they say on TV. Don't leave your home up there and come down here, you are gonna get stuck, eh. Come down with a lot of money. You gotta have family or friends that can put you up," he said.



At 6am each day, Papuni waits at the doors of a labour company, hoping to be picked for a job.



They are nice to him and he gets a hot cup of Milo.



Last year, he studied at the Christchurch Polytechnic Institute of Technology after learning he needed qualifications to get into the rebuild.



He arrived before the security guards each day to sneak in a shower.



None of his classmates knew he lived in a van. He took three homeless volunteer workers with him to graduation.



"That was real special, eh."



He did not want his family to know of his situation.



"I'm old enough to be able to look after myself," he said.



On the couch in the car port there is another rebuild worker, a scaffolder.



"He wouldn't sleep in the van . . . I give him as many blankets as I can," Papuni said.



The worker told Papuni the couch was better than waiting for the dead of night to find an abandoned building to sleep in.



Papuni's van is meticulously tidy, bed made perfectly, clothes and kai stashed away.



He adopted Crystal the kitten when he found her hungry near the van.



"Good for the soul, this wee girl is," he said.



His favourite joke is pulled out when people come to visit.



"I say to them hey fella, shut the door eh," he said, gesturing to the car port.



"They get half way up to do it and realise there ain't no door."



Those on the Government's $3000 grant for beneficiaries to join the rebuild soon regretted it, Papuni said.



"It's a have. It's not gonna last. [Landlords] want $1600 bond and another three weeks rent – there goes your three grand," he said.







"It's bloody hard. Most of the real estate people they want working people which is fair enough. I wish I were working."



At night in his people mover, Papuni frets.



"I'd be lucky to get five hours sleep because I wake up thinking 'what to do, what are you going to do today'."



Papuni is fearful he will turn back to alcohol, his demon from the past. He has been in trouble with the law, also something he long ago left behind him.



"I don't want to go back down into that hole but that's where I want to go . . . It [alcohol] just takes everything away and I can sleep," he said.



"Last week I thought I can't do this anymore. I'm lucky I've had a lot of rehab experience. I don't want to go back down there."



So while he sweeps the car port, he mutters to himself and kitten Crystal.



It keeps him safe.



This week, Canterbury's post-earthquake housing problems will be illustrated through a number of articles and videos showing people living in desperate circumstances. Social and health agencies say there is no bigger crisis facing the region than the security and affordability of housing. This is Home Truths.



READ MORE:

* 15 Filipino rebuild workers living one house

* Squatting in abandoned quake buildings

* Pensioner living in his car





John Kirk-Anderson Matua Papuni, 50, came down for the Christchurch rebuild and now lives in a broken down van in the eastern suburbs.

- Stuff