Heritage update: Saving our city's soul "We've got to keep some history of the city." ROSA SHIELS

Danielle Colvin Danielle Colvin Danielle Colvin Ron Keating is the project manager for the Knox Church rebuild. Riccarton House manager Rob Dally with a "before" shot of Catherine Deans' restored bedroom. Hello Sunday cafe in a heritage wooden building exudes warmth. Yasmeen Clark and Jonathan Spark, owners of neighbouring spiritual centre Pascha, in Sydenham, are proud to have restored the site. 0 of 0 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

Three years on, post-quake Christchurch has a vastly different countenance to the neat little, post-Victoriana city it once was.

Now that almost half of our cherished built heritage has been demolished, our eyes have been opened to the fate of what remains.

Before the quakes, the pride of the past was easily readable in the hand-hewn masonry and carved mottos on the facades of the old buildings. Elsewhere, on church corners, beside stately parks, scattered among suburbia and on country estates, grand architectural designs drew attention to themselves and their fancy curlicues and crenellations.

The list of what has gone is enough to induce dyspepsia and the scale of the physical damage is still bewildering. Roadworks and detours are plentiful, street signs are few. It is easy to get lost. Giant cranes scribe the skyline.

Fortunately, the maths is positive: if half is lost, then half remains. And there are plenty of people with sound knowledge and determination working on in a spirit of possibility and co-operation to save the remaining half.

Many heritage buildings are propped up by containers or wrapped in plywood while their fate is decided courtesy of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, insurance or private money, and goodwill. Others have already reopened or are works in progress.

Knox Church

For so long Knox Church has stood on the corner of Victoria St and Bealey Ave, the walls gone and the roof supported on slender uprights, an outline sketch of sorts of the fallen church. There was a palpable sense of relief when the hoardings went up and work began inside.

"It's one of the most exciting projects I've ever been involved in," says Ron Keating, project manager for the rebuild on behalf of the parish. "The post-tensioned concrete buttress columns are, we believe, the first that have been used anywhere in the world for a heritage building. They were developed in Japan and used widely in America, but we don't know of anywhere it's been done in New Zealand."

As the progress becomes more obvious, excitement is mounting among those who love the building. Surprisingly, much was retained, and will either be reused or replaced with like materials.

"At the end of the day, we won't have lost a great deal," Ron says. "We were able to recover most of the wall panelling inside and the roof structure - all that beautiful timber - has been saved in total. It will be cleaned and tidied up. The new roof cladding will go on and the roof will be raised marginally to allow for thermal and acoustic material."

The exterior will feature acid-etched panels and copper sheathing, and large clear-glass, double-glazed windows will allow in more natural light. The beautiful stained-glass window on the Victoria St end, crafted by Stewart Stained Glass in Loburn, is gone, but another is planned to take its place.

Ron is particularly excited about the organ. "We're restoring it to its original 1906 state and it's being upgraded by the South Island Organ Company with additional pipes suitable for orchestral work."

Its sound will be enhanced by the new acoustic design, and the original sloping floor of the church "for line of sight" has been retained, which benefits church services and the venue's planned wider use for music, lectures and theatrical performances.

Riccarton House

Across town, historic Riccarton House is progressing apace and is due to reopen soon.

Rob Dally has been the manager of Riccarton House and Bush for seven years and will continue until June, when he retires. Until then, he is intimately involved with its restoration. He was at his desk on the first floor during the February quake and has been involved in every step of the rebuild.

"It was built in three stages: 1856, 1874 and 1900 and where it was joined together, was not as robust as it could be," Rob says. Each successive part of the building was stronger and I think this was because they had experienced earthquakes. In Jane Deans' book, Letters to My Grandchildren (1888), she talks about the 1869 earthquake. She was in the original house and thought it was going to fall down."

The later buildings were reinforced with diagonal bracing, which was visible when the wall linings were removed. "The builders and the engineers were amazed. That's one of the reasons this place has stood up so well to the earthquakes," Rob says.

"It's been a phenomenal project of dedicated trades and professional people. The guy who did the wallpaper said, 'I was nearly going to do it for nothing. That's how much I wanted to come here.'

"It's been a thrilling project for me, personally, and the Deans are thrilled with what's happening. They're quite emotional about it. They have a great feeling of pride and ownership."

Shands Emporium

Several time-worn buildings, not so prominent but among the oldest in the city, are gaining new life, courtesy of their involved owners.

Shands Emporium is one of them. For decades, the Hereford St premises attracted lovers of curios to its street-front shop, while secondhand clothing aficionados sought their goods above.

Sadly, there was no room for it in Antony Gough's $140 million central-city development, so he gifted it to Redcliffs resident Peter Croft, who will move it to Redcliffs for restoration, near his other restored heritage property, Mother Hubbard's, aka the Red House.

At present, Peter feels hamstrung by officialdom and the "burden of process".

"Restoring the building is not an issue," he says. "To be honest, the big issue is the city council. With the Red House, I just returned it to its original condition, but it's a total unknown now. There are new rules and regulations and a lot of misunderstanding of these."

He hopes the emporium can be moved to Redcliffs before winter, but "the important thing is to save the building".

"I'm a Christchurch person and it's part of what we are," he says. "There's a charm of little old wooden colonial buildings - something that modern architecture doesn't have. It's Christchurch's roots."

Cafe and spiritual centre

The other old favourites, a matching pair in Elgin St, Sydenham, have new raiment and purpose as side-by-side businesses: the Hello Sunday café and Pascha, a spiritual and personal wellbeing centre with offices, teaching rooms and retail space.

Jonathan Spark owns Pascha with his wife, Yasmeen Clark, and they are in a shareholding partnership with café owner-manager Chris Penny.

"The larger building was built on site in 1901 as the Baptist church," Jonathan says. "Then the Sunday school was shifted to the site around the turn of last century. It's an older building from about 1870. We think it used to be a post office. It was sold to the [church] in about 1923."

They believe it is one of the 12 oldest remaining buildings in Christchurch.

"To take on a building like this, you have to be prepared to love it," Jonathan says. "What we took on was a mess, but the building itself had withstood the earthquakes very well. The repairs were primarily lath and plaster, but there was also disrepair because of lack of care. It was step-by-step progress. The building kept telling me what it needed next."

The renovations revealed some of the hidden beauty and strength of the old structure.

"I removed the false ceiling and found the wonderful old kauri trusses. Also, one of the reasons the building stood up so well was that it has inch-thick kauri tongue-and-groove throughout the ceiling. It's magnificent.

"We have had people come in and get quite emotional about the fact that we've restored these buildings."

The heritage team

The heritage buildings in Christchurch and on Banks Peninsula on the Christchurch City Council's master list are rated from one to four, with heritage-one listed buildings being of national or international significance and two to four of local or regional significance. The council owns some and others are privately owned. Philip Barrett is the leader of the council's heritage response team.

The team, which includes a heritage consultant and a structural engineer, provides ratepayer-funded advice to the owners of listed heritage buildings, council-owned or otherwise.

"Cera, under section 38 of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act, can sign off on the demolition of buildings, heritage or otherwise," Philip says. "We provide comment about a heritage building and the work we are doing with the owners, then they make the decision about that building."

Often, the financial strain of restoration is too great for an owner and a building is demolished. In other circumstances, a rebuild is possible, but there is a financial shortfall. Three sources of funding are available to help plug such shortfalls. The first is the long-running Council Heritage Incentive Grant.

"In previous years, it has been $763,000. It's a generous fund and it's well utilised," Philip says. Funding from this source comprises a percentage of the cost and payment is made on completion of the work.

The second fund, administered by the council and matched dollar for dollar up to $5 million by the Government, is the Canterbury Earthquake Heritage Buildings Fund, which was established after the September 2010 earthquake and exists to bridge the funding gap on buildings deemed worthy of saving.

The third is the Central City Landmarks Heritage Grant. Last financial year, there was $2.7 million in the fund, this year it is $1.2m and next year it will be about $1.7m. This money is earmarked for prominent central-city buildings of landmark status.

The former Trinity Congregational Church, latterly the Octagon Restaurant, on Worcester St is a recipient of landmark funding, as is the original Benjamin Mountfort-designed part of the Christchurch Club in Latimer Square.

"Our statistics show that we've lost just under 50 per cent of the listed heritage buildings within the four avenues, particularly in the former red zone," Philip says. "We've got to keep some history of the city."

As certain buildings have been demolished, part of the huge cache of their heritage fabric - old oak doors, kauri windows, carved mottos, and so on - has been saved and stored for reuse by the council.

"We hope these can be used by anybody who wishes to build on that site and incorporate them somehow into the building again," Philip says.

The future

Across the city, there is so much still undecided. What we do know is that Christchurch will never be the same. With nearly half of our built heritage gone, there is no going back. This is not Dresden; we are not rebuilding to the same historic blueprint. For those who felt oppressed by the staid old city, this is a great opportunity to start afresh.

Future history will tell the story of our city, O-Tautahi, from pre-history and early Maori, through colonial settlement, to post-war and pre-quake prosperity. Then, it will recount how the face and culture of Christchurch changed radically as a result of the major earthquakes and aftershocks of 2010 and 2011.

Few of us who knew the old will live long enough to see what the new will look like; we can only speculate on the possibilities. But some of the old character will remain. The dedicated among us are seeing to that.

Heritage watch

One of Canterbury's most precious and earliest buildings, the Canterbury Provincial Council Buildings - built between 1858-1865 and often cited as architect Benjamin Mountfort's most important work - sustained massive damage in the February 2011 earthquake. It is expected this historic building will be fully restored and at the moment it is undergoing stabilisation and extensive waterproofing. How the next stage unfolds is in the hands of the Christchurch City Council, in consultation with the Department of Conservation and the New Zealand Historic Places Trust.

Another exceptional heritage one-listed building is Our City O-Tautahi, the former Municipal Chambers on the corner of Oxford Tce and Worcester St. Designed by Samuel Hurst Seager, it was built in 1887 in the Queen Anne style, with fanciful turrets, exterior feature sculptures, and beautiful timber interiors. It has been stabilised and its damaged parts partially deconstructed. The complexities of a rebuild are still under consideration.

The Sign of the Kiwi resthouse on the Port Hills is another Hurst Seager design. Small, but not insignificant, it is a feature on the top of Dyers Pass Rd, with grand views of both the Canterbury Plains and Lyttelton Harbour. It remains closed while engineering and architectural plans for its repair are under discussion.

It is expected work on the Sign of the Takahe in Cashmere, formerly known as the Tram Terminus resthouse and latterly a privately owned restaurant, will be completed next year.

At the foot of the hills, the Old Stone House is still awaiting concept plans for repairs.

Another of the city's early treasures is Cuningham House, the Christchurch Botanic Gardens' 1922 neo-classical glasshouse, containing the tropical plants collection. Modelled on the Reid Winter Garden in Glasgow, Cuningham House has a heritage-two rating and a collection of international scientific significance. All that aside, with its domed glass roof, steel latticework and Italianate appearance, it is simply a stunning building. It is set to reopen as this story goes to print.

One of the city's most interesting old buildings is the privately owned McLean's Mansion on Manchester St. Its quirky twin-tower rooms can be seen from many vantage points.

This heritage one-listed wooden mansion - reputedly the largest wooden house in Australia and New Zealand when it was built at the turn of last century - is essentially a house of cards, looking fine on the outside but fragile within. There have been offers to save it, which fell through at the last minute, but there is hope for more material ones soon. The Christchurch skyline would certainly be a lesser place without it.

Comments