Housing New Zealand to miss Christchurch rebuild target

Stacy Squires A Housing New Zealand development of 12 homes on Waltham Rd in Christchurch.

Housing New Zealand's (HNZ) vow to finish building 700 new homes for Cantabrians by the end of this year will not be kept.

In February 2013, HNZ said it would rebuild 700 state homes lost in the earthquakes by the end of this year as part of a $170m project.

That target has now been revised to "early next year".

As of March, the Christchurch state housing waiting list was 539.

READ MORE:

* 700 new state homes for Christchurch

* Recovery 'ignores' poor

* Housing struggle

The Ministry of Social Development said it could not provide updated numbers, including numbers of people in higher categories of need.

"We are only able to report by quarter, next quarter publication dates are on the website, " a spokesman said.

When questioned whether the 2015 target would be met, government ministers and Housing New Zealand gave different finish dates.

HNZ Canterbury earthquake recovery programme general manager Paul Commons said on Wednesday it was "on track" to complete the homes, with the majority to be delivered in the "final quarter of 2015".

Later, in a joint statement, Social Housing Minister Paula Bennett and Minister Bill English said the target date was next year.

"With most of the front-end consenting and contract preparation work now complete, Housing New Zealand expects to finish building all the new homes early next year," the statement said.

Commons, when asked who was correct, said unforseen delays could see a small number of houses not completed until early 2016.

"With a programme of this size, there is always a possibility for unforseen delays (weather, land conditions and other circumstance). The safety of our builders and the quality of construction will not be compromised for speed of construction," he said.

Labour MP Poto Williams said it was another "shattered" promise to Canterbury.

Her information showed that to meet the 2015 target, two houses would need to be built a day.

"Those of us who support members of our community who are desperate for housing know that every day extra someone spends in a shed, or car or in an overcrowded house is another day that impact their health and their wellbeing and it's just not right," she said.

In December, the Government insisted it would meet the 2015 deadline. At that stage, 103 homes had been built.

As of the end of May, 191 homes have been built.

Commons said the remainder were under contract with 17 building companies for construction dates in 2015.

"The building of new homes on schedule is a key target but is not the end of the story," he said.

"Hundreds of tenants and their families are already enjoying the results of the new homes being built across greater Christchurch."

The homes built would be modern and deliver "better health outcomes" for families, Commons said.

- Stuff