'Huge wave of support' for locally-led recovery

RebuildChristchurch/YouTube Christchurch broadcaster Chris Lynch, Rebuild Christchurch founder Deon Swiggs and film maker Gerard Smyth talked to residents about the city's the recovery over the weekend.

Campaigns to promote a locally-led recovery for the next five years have generated hundreds of public submissions in a few days.

On Friday, the Government had received 70 submissions on its draft transition recovery plan, which lays out the power structure to be shared between the Christchurch City Council, the Government and other agencies for the next phase of the city's rebuild.

Four days later, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) had received 1600 submissions on the draft plan.

Stacy Squires Feedback on the Government's draft transitional plan, which will determine the next phase of the city's recovery, is due on Thursday at 5pm.

The wave of community engagement came after local groups encouraged Christchurch residents to engage in the process through facebook pages, public meetings, a video and the launch of a quick submission form last week.

READ MORE:

* Who will run the Christchurch rebuild?

* Eclectic bunch turn out for earthquake recovery talk

* Five reasons to have your say on Christchurch's recovery

* Council claws back rebuild power

* Christchurch councillors weigh in on anti-Brownlee blog

* Mike Yardley: City Council-led rebuild would be 'cataclysmic'

A video featuring Christchurch broadcaster Chris Lynch and Rebuild Christchurch founder Deon Swiggs interviewing various citizens of Christchurch about their views on the proposals also promoted the quick submission process.

The video has been watched more than 30,000 times since its launch on Monday.

It also promoted the quick submission form, which campaigning organisation ActionStation launched last week.

ActionStation said it had received 1800 separate submissions from around the country in support of a council-led recovery.

Spokesman Barnaby Bennett said a "huge wave of support" for a locally-led recovery had been pouring in thanks to community campaigns.

After four years with limited public engagement, residents needed to have their attention refocused, he said.

Bennett called for an end to the Government's emergency powers over Christchurch and a leadership return to the local council and communities.

"The current structure set up to deal with the earthquake recovery is not working, and has resulted in both delays and the exclusion of the public from participating in the recovery. The only way to increase the speed of the rebuild and involve the people of Christchurch is to return leadership of the rebuild to the local council and communities, with the Government in a support capacity," he said.

You can comment on the draft transition recovery plan through an online form, or by emailing info@cera.govt.nz. You can also go to Cera's Facebook page or use ActionStation's quick form at www.actionstation.org.nz/christchurch.

Feedback is due by 5pm on Thursday, July 30.

- Stuff