Insurers 'waiting for claimants to give in'

STACY SQUIRES / Fairfax NZ WAITING ANSWERS: Hundreds of people gathered in the Transitional Cathedral last nigth to talk about their earthquake claims.

Insurers are playing delay tactics and putting pressure on homeowners to cash-settle for earthquake damage to save money, an insurance commentator believes.

Cam Preston said insurers waited for claimants to "throw in the towel and accept a lower standard or cheaper fix, usually cash".

He addressed quake-hit homeowners at the Transitional Cathedral last night, along with experts discussing quake issues.

He based his views on insurance data he collected from private insurers.

Quarterly insurance figures compiled by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority released last month showed insurers has settled 57 per cent of the 23,952 overcap claims.

Of the settled claims, 78 per cent were cash-settled and 21 per cent were rebuilds or repairs managed by insurers.

Insurance Council of New Zealand (ICNZ) chief executive Tim Grafton rejected Preston's views.

"Mr Preston is wrong. His assertions are totally rejected. They are misguided, misconceived and deliberately mischievous."

Grafton said 6000 of the more than 10,000 total cash settlements occurred early in red zones, where people could no longer rebuild.

In other cases, people chose cash settlements because they wanted to buy another home or preferred to manage their own repair or rebuild.

"We have repeatedly stated over the past few years that delays are not in the insurer's interests either on grounds of costs and only contribute to brand damage."

The Transitional Cathedral was last night packed full of about 350 homeowners still struggling to settle their quake claims. Dozens of people stood at the back.

They booed and laughed when Earthquake Commission (EQC) chief executive Ian Simpson said, in a pre-recorded interview, "We've pushed as hard as we can . . . to get claims resolved as fast as possible".

Christchurch city councillor Ali Jones opened the meeting.

"There is pressure and stress and upset in the room tonight".

Christchurch homeowner Kaye Barrett said she came to the meeting to find answers. She was still battling her insurer to reach an acceptable settlement and felt "really frustrated".

Her insurer's cash offer would not be enough to fix her house, she said.

There had been scopes from EQC, insurance companies and independent assessors.

She said communication with her insurer had been "dreadful" and she had felt bullied and lied to.

Homeowners still struggling with their earthquake claim received free expert advice at the meeting. Speakers included insurance lawyer Duncan Webb, Peter Woods of Anthony Harper, professional surveyor Adrian Cowie, foundation practitioner Bevan Craig, Christchurch City councillor Ali Jones, and insurance advocate Dean Lester.

BY THE NUMBERS

* 23,952 over cap claims handled by private insurers.

* 13,566 claims settled so far.

* 78 per cent (10,676 claims) were cash-settled, including 6000 red zone properties.

* 21 per cent (2890 claims) were insurance-managed completed rebuilds and repairs.

Have you felt pressured to cash-settle your claim by your insurer or EQC? Or have you cash-settled for practical reasons. Please contact our reporter Cécile Meier at cecile.meier@press.co.nz.

- The Press