Is Christchurch in danger of becoming a 'bland' city?

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee has rejected claims Christchurch is in danger of becoming a "bland" city.

Brownlee told the New Zealand Council of Infrastructure Development (NZCID) conference in Christchurch on Thursday he had to "express disappointment" with comments made by the council's chief executive last month about the city's recovery, rebuild and future planning.

NZCID chief executive Stephen Selwood had said Christchurch was going to be distinctive but was headed for bland.

SUPPLIED JOSEPH JOHNSON/FAIRFAXNZ DEAN KOZANIC/FAIRFAXNZ STACY SQUIRES/FAIRFAXNZ unknown JOHN KIRK-ANDERSON/FAIRFAXNZ JOSEPH JOHNSON/FAIRFAXNZ unknown DEAN KOZANIC/FAIRFAXNZ unknown Detail of the Stranges building, on the corner of Lichfield and High streets. UniMed office building in Gloucester St. A building developed by Richard Peebles at 329 Durham Street North. The Deloitte building at 151 Cambridge Tce. Young Hunter office building, Victoria St. Sunset reflects of the Christchurch City Council building windows, left, while lights burn in the HSBC Tower, right. Knox Presbyterian Church, on the corner of Papanui Rd and Bealey Ave. An office building at 177 Victoria St. The St Elmo Courts replacement building on the corner of Montreal and Hereford streets. Business park building at 39 Princess St, Addington. 1 of 10 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

"I hear words like 'what a disappointment', 'a fantastic opportunity lost'," Selwood said.

Brownlee said he was "extremely proud" of what had been achieved so far in the city's $40 billion earthquake rebuild and did not think it was bad to "take time" with large projects like the metro sports facility or the convention centre.

"The grim picture painted early on by some of an empty city with a declining population and a declining economy has definitely not come to pass," he said.

John Kirk-Anderson/Fairfax NZ Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee believes Christchurch has an opportunity to become the "best small city in the world".

"The planned and systematic approach we've taken is considered by many international experts to be peerless, so it was a little disappointing that the NZCID description was that the city was facing an opportunity lost and looking like it was building something a little bland."

READ MORE:

* Council claws back rebuild power

* Christchurch councillors weigh in on anti-Brownlee blog

* Mike Yardley: City Council-led rebuild would be 'cataclysmic'

* Christchurch rebuild: From recovery to 'regeneration'

Brownlee said it was anticipated that every dollar the Government invested in the rebuild would be matched by six from private sector investors and recent figures from Colliers International showed about 22,000 square metres of office space had been built in the central city since 2011.

"This tells us the forecasts of some armchair critics that Christchurch's CBD would become a doughnut, with development on the fringes only because there was no confidence to build in the centre, are completely unfounded."

Selwood said Brownlee might have taken his comments out of context.

"I was really just saying that we're at an opportunity right now . . . to really get it right for Christchurch. Getting the right governance structure going forward is really key."

Those at Thursday's conference were "consistently" asking why two development organisations were being created for the next phase of Christchurch's recovery – one led by the council and one by the Government – when it just needed "one quality agency", he said.

"You'll be recruiting in the same market for the very best people . . . there's not a lot around."

The next step taken by those in power was critical to ensure Christchurch did not become a bland city, Selwood said.

"We've now got to grasp the opportunities in front to make sure that doesn't happen. You've got to make sure you've got the very best people to lead that."

Christchurch architect Jasper van der Lingen, of Sheppard and Rout, said he was excited about the city's future and did not believe it was in danger of becoming "bland" or "doughnut-like".

Exciting developments like Antony Gough's Terraces project, Nick Hunt's BNZ Centre, and Tim Glasson's ANZ Centre were already under way, he said.

"It just shows people are out ot touch. [They] haven't had a close look at what's happening.

"Two or three years is all it's going to take. People will be amazed at how different the city is."

Christchurch businessman Humphry Rolleston told the NZCID conference there was an assumption that buildings were all it took to create a successful city but in his experience success had "great little to do with buildings, it's got everything to do with planning".

"[If done again] you'd do everything the Government did at the beginning, then you would get out of the way and you'd bring people in making decisions who know what they are talking about and are experienced."

The organisation proposed to replace the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority should be jointly owned by the Government and the city council, and its board needed to have a cross-section of skills, he said.

Rolleston suggested the new board needed to review the city's remaining anchor projects, consider how 20,000 people would choose to live within the four avenues, embrace technology changes to attract businesses and help them grow, and change the way the inner city street network operated to improve living and working "experiences".

- Stuff