Ian Taylor

Animation of new Cathedral Square rebuild proposal.

SUPPLIED OUT OF THE BOX: An artist’s impression from designers Beyond Green shows the living cathedral concept for Christchurch’s Cathedral Square. Relevant offers

A bold vision for Cathedral Square that includes preserving parts of the damaged Christ Church Cathedral has caught the attention of the South Island's largest iwi.

Ngai Tahu chief executive Arihia Bennett yesterday said the tribe had been in discussions with expatriate Cantabrian Euan Harkness about his $80 million ''living cathedral'' concept.

Harkness, who is now based in Britain, told The Press Ngai Tahu was considering building its planned Te Puna Ahurea Cultural Centre in the Square.

Bennett said no decision about the location of the centre had been made but Harkness had showed ''good manners'' by approaching the iwi first.

''He has engaged the city's partners - the council, [the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority] and Ngai Tahu - and we are interested in how this vision further develops from here.''

Ngai Tahu was hoping to ''further those discussions going into the future'', she said.

Harkness, the vice-chairman of Barclays Bank, said the design involved preserving the reinforced walls and frontage of the cathedral and using the church's footprint as a memorial garden and public space, all under a floating timber canopy.

Speaking from London, he said a bold Cathedral Square that incorporated the original church as a ''natural memorial'' would show the city's move away from its colonial style.

''The cathedral at one end, an avenue of trees under the canopy.. then the cultural centre at the other end, which will present the history of Ngai Tahu and of Christchurch.''

Harkness was passionate about using the opportunity presented by the 2010-2011 earthquakes to create something ''truly unique''.

Speaking about the Great Christchurch Building Trust's (GCBT) public relations campaign to convince Kiwis the icon should be restored, he said the cathedral needed to be a long-term symbol of the city's history and recovery.

His ''knee-jerk reaction'' to the February 2011 quake was to restore the cathedral but it needed to reflect more than the legacy of the British settlers who built it.

Harkness, who helped set up the British branch of the Christchurch quake appeal, approached designers and development strategists Beyond Green last year with the idea for a living cathedral in Christchurch.

Beyond Green invited Danish designers Schulze+Grassov and interdhnationally-renowned architects Grimshaw to turn their eye to the idea.

Harkness said he had good relationships with Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel, Cera and Anglican Bishop Victoria Matthews.

Anglican diocese spokesman Jayson Rhodes said the Church Property Trustees had met with Harkness twice.

The living cathedral vision had not been ruled out.

The trustees had been focusing on resolving court action brought against them by the GCBT and had not been able to ''look forward'', Rhodes said.

''The living cathedral has been one of the many options put forward to us. We're only starting now to look at the right way going forward.''

Ian Taylor, chief executive of Animated Research, has used three-dimensional modelling of the city to develop a video of Harkness' vision.

An open discussion about the cathedral and the Square could now take place because ''the context of the surrounding city is there now'', Taylor said.

The modelling work Cera had done allowed Cantabrians to make ''informed opinions'' about the future of the city's heart.

''The concept is a bit out of the box but so were the earthquakes,'' he said.

- The Press

Comments