Jenny Shipley to lead transition from Cera

Lawrence Smith/Fairfax Media POST CERA: The board will be led by former prime minister Dame Jenny Shipley.

A who's who of Canterbury powerbrokers will oversee the transition of power back to local authorities in Christchurch.

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee yesterday announced the establishment of an advisory board that would provide advice about the "transition of functions and powers" held by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) to local agencies.

The board, led by former prime minister Dame Jenny Shipley, includes Christchurch mayor Lianne Dalziel, Ngai Tahu kaiwhakahaere (chairman) Sir Mark Solomon, Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce chief executive Peter Townsend and Environment Canterbury chairwoman Dame Margaret Bazley.

Others on the board are: Kelvin Coe, representing Selwyn District Council, David Ayers, representing Waimakariri District Council, Darren Wright, Leanne Curtis, Maggy Tai Rakena, Gill Cox, Mary Devine.

Community leaders said the board could mean more local involvement in recovery decisions but Brownlee must listen to the board's members.

Brownlee said its first meeting would be in January. The board would exist until December.

"As I signalled from the inception of Cera, there will be a gradual transition of recovery responsibilities, including the removal or scaling back of powers provided for by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery (CER) Act that are no longer deemed necessary to maintain the momentum of the recovery."

Spokesman for the Wider Earthquakes Communities Action Network community group, Brent Cairns, said Brownlee should listen to the new board.

"This is a long time coming but how much influence are we really going to have? As long as minister Brownlee listens to local people's suggestions rather than being autocratic in his rulings, this could be good," he said. "It is shame it has taken four years for this to happen."

The CER Act expires in April 2016.

On February 1 Cera will merge into the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, the first major step in winding back Cera's special earthquake powers.

Brownlee said the Government's commitment to Christchurch remained as "strong as ever".

BOARD MEMBERS

Lianne Dalziel (Christchurch City Council)

Dame Margaret Bazley (Environment Canterbury)

Sir Mark Solomon (Ngai Tahu)

Kelvin Coe (Selwyn District Council)

David Ayers (Waimakariri District Council)

Darren Wright (community sector)

Leanne Curtis (community sector)

Maggy Tai Rakena (not-for- profit sector)

Peter Townsend (business sector)

Gill Cox (business sector)

Mary Devine (business sector)

- The Press