John Key says shoddy quake repairs should be fixed

Kirk Hargreaves CLOSER LOOK: 'If the work hasn't been done at a good enough level, then it needs to be resolved,' says Prime Minister John Key.

Prime Minister John Key says shoddy repair work on earthquake-damaged Canterbury homes is "worrying" and any repairs not up to par should be fixed.

The Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment has started an investigation into repair quality after it checked repairs on 14 houses and found poor workmanship, quality and building code compliance issues in 13 of them.

The Earthquake Commission (EQC) had managed repairs for all but one.

READ MORE: Shoddy quake repairs revealed

Key said in Christchurch today that shoddy repair work under EQC's home-repair programme should be fixed.

That 13 of 14 homes inspected at the request of concerned homeowners had sub-par repairs was a "worrying number".

"Some repairs have been undertaken at a standard that's not acceptable. Where that's the case, we need to have those remedied," Key said.

"We need to look a little bit closer on that."

Did you have issues with your EQC repairs? Email joelle.dally@press.co.nz with your contact details.

Key said 65,000 home repairs had been undertaken, and his office had not been "flooded" by complaints.

He had heard from many Christchurch residents who were satisfied with their repairs.

"I suspect the vast bulk of them have actually been done satisfactorily," he said.

"If the work hasn't been done at a good enough level, then it needs to be resolved ... the contract needs to be met."

The home-repair programme stopped homeowners from having poor repairs done and pocketing the balance of the cash.

"I think it would be a much bigger risk if the [EQC] programme wasn't there, but if there is an issue we need to go away and look at it and how serious it is," Key said.

EQC Canterbury home-repair programme general manager Reid Stiven said earlier that the 13 houses were not a representative sample, and 86 per cent of programme customers were satisfied with their repairs.

The organisation's annual report found only one in three customers was satisfied with the quality of service received, while one in five staff members was paid more than $100,000 a year.

- The Press