Johnny Moore: Christchurch rebuild 'wasteful and ill-planned'

Kirk Hargreaves/Fairfax NZ Johnny Moore argues that leaving the Westende Building - or any building - standing must be better than the "razed landscape" Christchurch has been left with.

OPINION: Westende House on Manchester Street is due for demolition. The first central city building constructed after the earthquakes, Westende House has become a symbol of the wastefulness of the Christchurch rebuild.

C'mon, you must have noticed how wasteful and ill-planned the rebuild has been: a footpath gets dug up days after being resealed, recyclable materials are piled into landfills and brand new buildings are scheduled for demolition. The phenomenal scale of wastefulness becomes apparent with each passing day.

Westende House is ostensibly being levelled to allow for the widening of Manchester St, which has been redesigned to be a major traffic route through the city. But sources inside City Hall tell me the widening could be achieved without the removal of the building.

If this is true then why is it being demolished? Because it's part of the plan stupid. And don't question the plan.

Personally, I don't love the architecture on display at Westende House, but it's not whether I like the building or not that's the issue. It's the taking of a perfectly sound building and demolishing it because it's written into some immovable plan.

When I look at the central city as it currently sits, I wonder if we were all too hung up on beautiful buildings and forgot that what's going on inside the building is more important than what you see from the street.

Because surely a building – any building – is better than the razed landscape we've been left with in the city.

Please don't tell me how green and sustainable the rebuild is going to be when perfectly good buildings are being ground up and dumped into the harbour.

Mayor Lianne Dalziel has been in the paper this week asking how the building was allowed to be built in the first place. But built it is. There she stands.

It's like Israel - we can argue about it's right to exist but exist it does and the best we can do is make a plan moving forward that acknowledges its existence.

Surely the best thing to do is to take something that exists and put it to best use. Because the money tree seems to have rot in its roots and we will only get a couple more blossoms before it's dead and we have to pay to remove it.

Maybe we've transitioned into the pig-headed phase of the rebuild where people have points to score and they're gonna do what they're gonna do no matter what. Or maybe Joe Public is so sick of the whole thing that he just lies prone and waits for this phase of the disaster to be over.

Surely the egos running the rebuild aren't so huge that they can't see wastefulness when it's staring them in the face.

So I ask two questions addressing wastefulness: If the building is to be demolished, what genius decided to landscape the footpath outside it? And more importantly: Why are we demolishing a building when the plan – whether you agree with it or not – can be achieved without its demolition?

- Stuff