Judge: Cera's slow demolitions not to blame for arsons

Iain McGregor Houses in the residential red zone.

A judge has rejected a defence lawyer's suggestion that the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority's (Cera) slowness in carrying out red zone demolitions has contributed to Christchurch's spate of arsons.

Cera has listed 35 red zone arsons since the earthquakes, and a representative was at the Christchurch District Court today for the jailing of an arsonist for three years ten months.

Counsel Andrew Bailey, appearing for Errol Carl Tait at his sentencing, said: "It does seem that it has taken a very long time for the red zone properties to have been demolished."

If the properties had been dealt with earlier, 43-year-old Tait would not have set fire to a property in Avonside in December, and would not have got the encouragement from that to set fires that damaged the offices and a van of a former employer.

But Judge Gary MacAskill said: "I simply don't accept that suggestion." It amounted to blaming Cera for Tait's criminal acts.

"There has been a serious problem with arsons since the time of the earthquake. One of the problems is that they are difficult to trace because offenders come and go before they can be apprehended," said the judge.

Tait had pleaded guilty to two charges of arson, attempted arson, and burglary.

A report by a clinical psychologist had been prepared ahead of the sentencing.

The court was told that Tait's family became homeless after the earthquakes, which led to anxiety and depression. When he partner was hospitalised, Tait had four children to look after, took time off work, and eventually lost the job he had held for 10 years. He became bitter and depressed and began drinking.

He was drinking when he went to a red zone property in Avonside, on December 5, with a bottle of accelerant which he used to set light to curtains, a shed, and decking. The fire spread, and according to Cera it cost an extra $30,000 to demolish the property because of the arson.

In January, he went to his former employers' offices where he set fire to a parked van, and tried to set light to the offices. He went back later and threw a molotov cocktail through the office window, causing significant damage from fire and smoke.

The insurance company paid out $140,000 for those arsons, but the amount did not cover all the employer's losses. The company had to rent other premises to continue its operations.

Tait then burgled another office building and stole electronic gear.

Judge MacAskill noted that Tait had been attending counselling at the Community Alcohol and Drugs Service, and had not had alcohol for six months. Reports said he regretted the offending. His reoffending risk would be reduced by further alcohol and drug counselling and for the issues that are generating his anger, the reports said.

He jailed Tait for three years ten months but made no reparation order because it could not be paid within a reasonable time.

- Stuff