EQC: Between a rock and a hard place

Liquefaction in an Avondale street after the December 23, 2011, quakes.

EQC is arousing suspicion again with its manoeuvring on the coming payouts for flood and liquefaction land damage. But is it just doing the right thing in a somewhat impossible situation? JOHN McCRONE reports.

So it was an "Oh, shoot!" kind of moment for you then? A few sheepish grins break out around the table. Officially they can't say that. But yes, pretty clearly it was.

The Earthquake Commission (EQC) has been taking a fair old battering for how it has been handling the Christchurch recovery. And it is no surprise that people are already suspicious about how it will deal with the next phase of its land damage payments.

Martin de Ruyter The earthquake saw water and liquefaction silt spew from the ground.

EQC has now paid out on much of the city's visible land damage, what it calls the category 1 to 7 claims which are to do with mending cracks in lawns or digging out silt from under floorboards.

And while some of the compensation amounts have seemed derisory - cheques for $10, the price of a few shovels of fill, which some home owners have posted back or framed to hang in the toilet - when spread across the whole of greater Christchurch, it is still costing EQC around $1 billion.

But this year EQC needs to sort out its category 8 and 9 claims, or what it calls the hidden land damage in the form of increased liquefaction vulnerability (ILV) and increased flooding vulnerability (IFV).

It has already mailed out notices to some 14,000 home owners advising them they may qualify. The wash-up is expected to be around 6000 with liquefaction risk, 6000 with flood risk, a further 2000 with both. And the sums involved could be generally more serious.

EQC is keeping the figures close to its chest but a 2014 budgeting document flushed out under the Official Information Act suggests well over half a billion dollars has been set aside for these land settlements. Divided up, the average would be $36,000 a property.

Yet EQC has also been busy the past 18 months with what at first blush appears a rather Heath Robinson-ish land repair technique for sections with liquefaction problems in particular.

EQC is calling it horizontal soil mixing (HSM). In bald terms, a drilling rig would set up in the garden and tunnel sideways under the house, making a row of fat bore holes at about water table level, the rotating bit churning cement powder into the wet soil as it went.

This cement would then set to create a raft of ground-stiffening rods, concrete columns using the saturated dirt as ready-mix. Possibly a couple of layers of these rods just to be sure.

A geotechnical fix never employed anywhere else in the world before. Tried out on a handful of derelict red-zone properties to demonstrate it is possible. Now perhaps a cheap way of dealing with land claims on the many sites around the city where the houses might be relatively fine but the earth beneath them has slumped dramatically.

EQC critic Cameron Preston - an accountant and speaker at the "Four Years On" insurance claimants rally at the Christchurch Cardboard Cathedral this Monday evening - says the alarm bells are really going off for him.

It is Preston who has been winkling confidential financial documents out of EQC.

And he says they reveal EQC has pre-emptively tabled a $213m saving on "enabling costs" on the back of this HSM fix - money it now does not expect to have to pay for lifting homes, clearing sections and stomping down the ground to repair people's land using more conventional geotech methods.

So something big is going on.

Preston says he does not want to sound paranoid but who trusts EQC to do the right thing these days?

We have just had the hoo-ha with EQC going to court, seeking a declaratory judgment on how it is going to handle the category 9 flood payments.

The answer there was a diminution of value formula. Land in Christchurch has dropped by up to a metre. But rather than going through the enormous cost of lifting only slightly damaged homes now at increased flood risk, putting them on top of higher foundations, EQC will be offering to cut a cheque to cover a property's loss of market value.

Well the detail of how those valuations are going to work are as clear as mud, says Preston. But one of EQC's internal documents, a 2014 audit from Melville Jessup Weaver, suggests a possible $102m saving by going the quick cash settlement route.

Then how is EQC going to manage its category 8 liquefaction liabilities is murkier still, Preston says. Is it hoping to use HSM as a paper repair, a strictly theoretical offer, that then allows it to underplay the true cost of fixing land when calculating a compensation payout - the outcome it really wants to achieve?

HSM certainly cannot be considered an acceptable alternative as far as he is concerned.

"It's a bit like those Mythbusters' guys they have on TV. They recreate things in a field in the middle of nowhere to prove it can be done, but there is no way in hell you would do it in your backyard, let alone base insurance settlements on it."

Yet others like Leanne Curtis of the Canterbury Communities' Earthquake Recovery Network (CanCern) say maybe for once EQC deserves more credit here.

Curtis says she does not doubt that parts of EQC's hierarchy will be looking to minimise what it needs to pay. It's ILV policy should be out in another month and the devil will be in the details, the various thresholds set on who can claim for what.

But she says there is also another part of EQC that is evidence driven and seems keen to meet the organisation's full obligations as an insurer.

"There's some extraordinarily good work being done behind the scenes.

There are people with great intentions even if none of that is evident to the customer."

Which brings us back to when a certain penny dropped for the EQC.

EQC head of Canterbury land claims Keith Land and Mike Jacka from EQC geotechnical consultant Tonkin and Taylor are talking about the unique nature of New Zealand's earthquake insurance and why the EQC's job has in fact been pretty difficult.

Land says remember that other countries just do not have a government-backed insurance that covers damage to your land as well as your home. So interpretations of what the EQC's founding act of Parliament covers have to be based on a history of local experience.

And then Canterbury got hit by an event that was unprecedented even internationally - a sequence of four big shakes that struck directly at a city half built on liquefiable swamp.

Thus there has been a genuine problem of working out EQC's policy land damage obligations.

Jacka picks up the story. He says there was indeed a particular "Oh, shoot!" day when the Tonkin and Taylor team were walking through the residential red zone near the Avon River and realised that the repeated earthquakes were having an unforeseen effect.

After each major quake, the liquefaction was getting noticeably worse.

"Traditionally land that gets shaken goes back to almost its original state," says Jacka. Water and silt are ejected through boils in the ground, but then the land dries and settles back to its pre-quake condition.

"However in Christchurch, it had a much more severe effect."

In simple language, Jacka says four big shakes pumped out up to a metre of wet undersoil, thinning the surface crust dramatically, bringing the dry top ever closer to the city's water table, and therefore increasing the chances of liquefaction breaking through with the next earthquake.

The quake sequence was doing lasting damage to the foundations of your foundations, Jacka says.

Tonkin and Taylor had been employed just to quantify the visible damage to property - the surface tears and slips. But this was now about how land had been left underneath and would perform in the future.

A thinner crust with a higher water table across large parts of Christchurch would mean greater liquefaction for the same amount of ground shaking if, say, the Alpine Fault went, or there was another local earthquake series.

And obviously, a higher water table also means less room for flood waters to drain away and, coupled with the ponding created where land had fallen, also increased people's future chances of flooding.

By rights, says Jacka, even though this crust thinning effect was never foreseen, the wording of EQC's insurance meant it must have a liability for this new form of land damage. Which is where the difficult questions started.

"I'm sure EQC's never forgiven us. They probably wish we'd just kept it to ourselves," Jacka jokes to Land. But swiftly he adds there was never a question about EQC not front-footing the issue.

"If EQC were trying to pull the wool over people's eyes, it wouldn't even have invented category 8 or 9. It could have paid out on category 1-7 and said there you go, have a nice day. But instead it went to a lot of effort to prove the damage was a thing and work out how to assess it," says Jacka.

Land confirms it was quickly evident that these further land damage settlements were going to be expensive and so from 2012 some large contingencies started to be booked on EQC's balance sheet and EQC began to consider what could be done to fix this land damage.

A first part of its investigations involved producing good information. Drilling results from 1500 locations were combined with aerial radar mapping to create a database showing the changes in ground level and water table across the city.

That gave EQC a way to alert Christchurch residents that their properties might have an ILV or IFV problem and then about $8m in trials began to investigate what repairs might be possible.

Land says increased flood risk due to land dropping can really only be mitigated either by paying for houses to be lifted on new foundations or by some area-wide protection scheme like drains and pumping stations.

The terms of EQC's insurance cover only individual properties, so that is why it has been the council that is under pressure to do something about area-wide risks. EQC money cannot be used for that.

And if homes are not damaged enough to require lifting for repairs, then again under the terms of its policy, EQC cannot be made to pay to put people's houses on stilts.

So Land says what the declaratory judgment ratified was that EQC could offer compensation payments based on how much a property might have been devalued, although the High Court added the proviso that EQC consider alternative resolutions if home owners dig in their toes and say they want the risk actually removed.

How that will now work given the lack of fixes is going to be interesting, he confesses.

However, when it came to increased liquefaction vulnerability due to crust thinning, EQC felt it worth investing in some geotech research.

Compressing what might normally be 10 years of engineering studies into 18 months, EQC recruited a team of experts, including US engineers from Cornell, Berkeley and the University of Texas, to investigate a variety of possible land repairs.

Most of them were techniques which could only be used on a cleared section with the house gone. They were in fact traditional ground-strengthening methods like compaction - banging the ground with a pile-driver - or boring in vertical columns of stone or grout.

Jacka says the results will give the insurance companies doing over-cap repairs and rebuilds - where foundations would be exposed - reassurance that land strengthening would do the job in Christchurch.

And then it was thought worth also trying to come up with something inventive for repairing land with dwellings in place.

Last year EQC found four red- zoned properties in Avondale and Bexley - some being double units so the second could be used as a control - and tested them with both single and double layer rafts of columns underneath.

A ring of explosive charges was detonated around the houses to simulate an earthquake, then the degree of liquefaction and subsidence was measured.

Now says Land, EQC is considering the results - both the engineering outcome and how much it would actually cost to do this to a lot of homes in the real world.

The EQC board is meeting next week and the promise is to deliver detail about how EQC plans to settle its ILV claims by the end of March. Land says he cannot second-guess what the answers will be.

"Obviously the trials were designed to provide some solutions. But whether those solutions therefore work at a practical level for an individual property is a combination of what a section's footprint is like - is there enough access - and do the economics work? All those things are still circling."

So EQC is asking to be trusted.

It says it is front-footing a category of damage that it never even knew it covered. It may have taken a while to find the answers, but now everyone will be paid out to the letter of the act.

Yet some will take more convincing. Preston and other critics of the insurance process - fellow "Four Years On" speakers like foundations expert Bevan Craig and lawyer Dr Duncan Webb - say people will be looking for the fish-hooks in the coming ILV and IFV offers.

Preston says the big question is whether horizontal soil mixing is merely serving as a distraction here - a way for EQC to claim all practical alternatives have been explored so it can instead wave compensation cheques under people's noses and get off more lightly.

Webb, who represented flood- prone Flockton basin owners at the declaratory judgment, asks how might loss of value be calculated in such a case?

He says if it is simply how much property buyers are going to knock off because of some perception about long-term risk, in practice the discounts tend to be small.

"There was some interesting analysis from valuers at the hearing which said if the property risk is from a greater than 1-in-50 year flood, then people would probably discount that to zero. They'll say we don't have to worry because it probably will never happen."

Liquefaction likewise would depend on perceptions about further earthquakes. So Webb warns payouts could be less than people expect - especially as it is just the land component that is being valued, not home and land.

However others are giving EQC credit for seriously exploring all the options.

Canterbury University professor of civil engineering Misko Cubrinovski, an expert on liquefaction, says he has been impressed by the HSM trials.

Cubrinovski says overseas there have been a few attempts to find solutions for protecting homes.

After the Kobe earthquake in Japan, some owners of expensive houses on reclaimed land used perimeter drains and pumps to reduce the water table in their neighbourhood. But it was expensive - they had to pay for it themselves - and not terribly effective.

HSM is a clever new solution, he says. And when the engineers dug into the ground after the blast tests, is was a surprise to see how neatly formed the concrete columns were. Cubrinovski says that shows contractors can certainly do the work with the precision required.

But he is equally sure that even this "cheap" fix will prove too expensive to be used on more than a few hundred homes at most. The price per property will be between $50,000 and $100,000. And EQC's land liability is effectively capped at not much more than that.

In worst case scenarios where a section is completely written off, EQC only has to payout to the value of the land directly under the house and 8 metres around it. Which for much of East Christchurch is going to be close to the price of attempting a repair.

So a flurry of compensation cheques looks more likely on that score.

As Insurance Council of New Zealand chief executive Tim Grafton notes, of course another thing that has been happening is that insurers have been getting claimants to sign over their coming ILV and IFV payments.

Grafton says this has allowed insurers working on repairs and rebuilds to get on with the job, putting money into strengthening the ground or raising floor levels while doing foundation work, on the promise they can recoup some of that later from the EQC.

Likewise another large customer waiting in line is the Crown which has inherited all the EQC claims on the suburbs it red- zoned.

So that gives EQC a simpler settlement pathway on what is going to be the majority of the city's worst affected properties. What will be left may be mostly small fry claims by comparison.

Naturally, however, how EQC decides to handle these claims will produce complaints of a city being short-changed. That is just how it is now for EQC. Its managers agree it works in a "low trust environment".

Four Years On, a discussion on managing insurance claims, is being held Monday, February 23, 6.30pm, at the Cardboard Cathedral, Latimer Square. Gold coin donation.

- Stuff