Fire rips through Taranaki school

Petra Finer/Stuff.co.nz Fire at Hawera Intermediate

Teachers and students are among the crowd of onlookers watching flames ripping through Hawera Intermediate School in South Taranaki.

Up to 10 classrooms have been destroyed as well as the library and school hall.

Firefighters have asked onlookers to get as far back from the fire as possible because of the fear there is asbestos in the roof of the school.

Credit: Amber Makinson Amber Makinson Amber Makinson Petra Finer Petra Finer Petra Finer Petra Finer Firefighters are battling a large fire at Hawera Intermediate School Firefighters are battling a large fire at Hawera Intermediate School. Firefighters are battling a large fire at Hawera Intermediate Firefighters are battling a large fire at Hawera Intermediate. Firefighters are battling a large fire at Hawera Intermediate. Firefighters are battling a large fire at Hawera Intermediate. Firefighters are battling a large fire at Hawera Intermediate. 1 of 7 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

Principal Craig Simpson said he was called about the fire at 6.30am and drove straight to Hawera from Opunake, where he lives.

"My reaction on the way - a good cry at Manaia helped," he said.

Simpson said many teachers and students were already at the school when he arrrived.

At least three classrooms are burnt out.

Various schools in the town had already offered spare classrooms but Simpson said no decisions had been made yet about how the school's 333 students would be accommodated.

"Our job is now to bounce back and look forward to the challenges of term four," he said.

The school would be closed today and most likely tomorrow.

Hawera chief fire officer Mike Fairweather said they were called to the fire at 5.50am.

At the height of the fire three classrooms, a hallway, the school hall and two other classrooms at the back of the school were ablaze.

There are 32 firefighters at the fire.

"It will take most of the day for us to put this out and clean our gear," he said.

"The main issue is getting the fire out and damping out hot spots so Fire Safety can come in and determine the cause."

Maddison Greenhalgh, 11, said she woke up to the sound sirens and only realised half an hour later that her school was on fire.

Her mother drove both her and her sister to the school to see what was happening.

"We got in the car and just sat here. It's shocking, I wouldn't have expected it.

"I'm just going to stand here and watch and see what happens because I'm sure there won't be any school today," she said.

She said she arrived about 10 minutes before fire crews were at the scene.

On Facebook Myma-Michael Myia Eichstaedt commented that it was "sad news" and the school's library had been totally destroyed.

Jenna Davis-Waite replied; "Oh no, my Mum's the librarian there!"

Krystie Harvey commented it would take weeks to clean up and rebuild.

"Here's hoping they find a quick solution so the kids can keep on learning and you'd really hope it wasn't arson as the kids are going to miss out on so many opportunities while this is being done," she wrote.

An Education Ministry team will inspect the school's buildings later today.

- Stuff