Latest announcement on Cera's replacement raises other questions

DAVID WALKER/FAIRFAX NZ Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee and Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel announcing plans for Regenerate Christchurch on Friday.

EDITORIAL: The shape of the agency expected to drive the next stages of the Christchurch rebuild is slowly becoming a little clearer.

But even after the latest announcement by the Government and the Christchurch City Council on Friday, the organisation still looks like an indistinct shadow behind a frosted-glass window, although its edges are gradually coming a bit more into focus.

Regenerate Christchurch, as the body will be known, will be born out of the legislation that will move the city into a post-Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority era come April, or earlier, next year.

Tweakings to the original model, announced in July, are being touted by both Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel and Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee as forming a "unique partnership" that breaks new ground in how central and local government might work together more usefully in the future.

Before we get too carried away on the crest of that wave, the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Bill has to be passed. It is expected to be brought before Parliament next month. But there are still questions to be answered and details that need explaining.

The latest announcement is for the agency to be jointly owned and funded by the Crown and the council. The board will be independent and report to both organisations. It will work hand-in-glove with the council's new company, Development Christchurch Ltd, and after five years will itself become a council-controlled organisation.

At the original unveiling two months ago, it was said that Brownlee would oversee Regenerate Christchurch, unless Prime Minister John Key decided otherwise. That has obviously happened. Is this perhaps another sign that council and the Government are getting on better together?

The new entity will oversee the development of the central city, the residential red zone and New Brighton. At the briefing, it was mentioned its special powers could include the ability to compulsorily acquire land and lodge statutory regeneration plans, which might be a good thing for those areas where nothing is happening in any great hurry. In New Brighton's case it could be a godsend.

Will it have other special powers? What about the anchor projects? What kind of public consultations will it carry out? Given the nature of consultations carried out by Cera, they could only be better.

In a potentially alarming move, Dalziel suggested the new agency might have the ability to revisit aspects of the central city blueprint. That would not necessarily be a good thing. Can you imagine the potential for further delay if we go back to square one?

We've been given a bit more of a peek at what could be the final set-up of this organisation. But at the moment it still seems rather as if the powers-that-be are slowly drawing a sheet of paper down a page covered with the full story, only revealing bite-sized chunks at a time.

- Stuff