Lessons from Lyttelton's rebuild Lessons from Lyttelton's rebuild

From the Christchurch side of the Port Hills, Lyttelton's rebuild seems one step ahead of other communities, but is it? WILL HARVIE reports nothing is easy, as the community and port find their feet again. If there is one lesson from Lyttelton so far, it's that the rebuild of Christchurch will be harder, longer and more expensive than most people imagine.

To casual observers, Lyttelton seems one step head of other communities. It looks like a little place with big earthquake challenges, which it is doggedly overcoming.

It seems as if Lyttelton will get faster to that magical place where the town is rebuilt, the community is content and the earthquake is no longer the signature event of the community. Yet nothing is easy in Lyttelton, almost nothing happens quickly and everything is more expensive than hoped.

For example, Lyttelton has perhaps the most obvious school merger in the province, yet combining the two primary schools is beset by challenges.

A year from now, if plans proceed, a merged school will operate from three campuses for at least two years, while a new school is built, if the money comes available. It could well take longer.

Lyttelton was the first commercial centre, along with Sydenham, to get a post-quake master plan from the Christchurch City Council, a process that started just months after the February 22, 2011, quake. The master plan was adopted by the council in June last year and a concrete step has been taken - a $550,000 purchase of land in London St that will become a new Civic Square.

However, little else from the master plan has progressed far and it seems likely that some things on the wishlist, such as getting port traffic off Lyttelton roads, is too tough and expensive.

Still, there are bright spots. Lyttelton will be among the first communities to get a new church. Actually, it's better than that. It will get a heritage church to replace a demolished heritage church. What other community can claim that much luck?

Meanwhile the port company, facing the single biggest and complex insurance repair and rebuild programme in the province, or southern hemisphere, according to some, weathers demands from residents to open the waterfront for recreation and touris, and to bring cruise ships back as soon as possible.

It can't all happen at once or even neatly. In Lyttelton, every step up is tugged the other way by the unforseen, by delays, by astronomical costs.

If there is one lesson from Lyttelton so far, it's that the rebuild of Christchurch will be harder, longer and more expensive than most people imagine.

A new school

Sue Walls, principal of Lyttelton Main School, and Diana Feary, principal of Lyttelton West School, don't quite finish each other's sentences, but their thoughts are almost in the same place.

"We've got past thinking of ourselves as the loser school," says Feary of West School's proposed merger with Main School under education restructuring in Christchurch.

Walls agrees. "It's better to see that two schools are closing and we're getting one new school."

By the end of the month, West School will file a last-ditch attempt with the Ministry of Education to stay independent, but even Feary says a merger "is inevitable".

Lyttelton's primary schools may be the most obvious merger candidates in the province. The schools are less than 1km apart, Main School had a role of 112 at July 2012, West School had a role of 134 at July 2012, and both underutilised their space.

Lyttelton was unlikely to attract significant numbers of outside students, argued the Ministry of Education.

Meanwhile, both schools suffered damage in the quakes and would need repairs, if not rebuilds.

Because classrooms are unsafe, some Main School students are being taught in a long-closed Catholic school nearby.

Under the ministry's plan, the two schools will become one on January 27 next year, but will continue to operate from three sites until a new school is built on the Main School site in central Lyttelton. The best outcome will be a new school for about 300 pupils, ready at the start of 2016.

As it happens, there was a proposal on the table before the quakes to rebuild Main School, and the merger plans picks up that idea and expands it.

The ministry is eyeing land to the south of Main School, now occupied by the police, and a privately owned 417-square-metre section where a historic building, now demolished, once stood. Last Monday, the ministry opened negotiations to buy this land.

This being Christchurch, the merger proposals were not greeted with unanimous joy. West School families, in particular, opposed the merger, as they had some years before the quakes when the schools ran a joint consultation on merging.

West School families liked their school, its culture and the link to Maori communities down the harbour and didn't like the prospect of longer walks to another school. Main School families backed the merger, before and after the quakes.

The principals and their school boards have already moved on and are trying to bring the families along. The mood at recent community meetings has been good, Feary reports.

"We're keeping the children at the heart of things," says Walls, "while paying respect and homage to the traditions of the two schools".

"We're standing tall together," says Feary.

There may be tension to come. The merged school won't need two principals. For now Walls and Feary speak of a "principalship" and acknowledge they would consider job-sharing. But that will be up to the new board of the merged school.

A masterful plan

City councillor for Banks Peninsula Claudia Reid is obviously frail after a long battle last year with cancer, but her eyes burn bright when it's suggested that Lyttelton is one step ahead.

"Yes, that's exactly right," she says over coffee in a Lyttelton cafe.

The port community was being consulted even before the Christchurch City Council wowed the city in May and June 2011 with it's Share an Idea effort.

"We constructively challenged our losses, and asked how [they] could be replaced and restored and what needed to happen to recover," she says.

That was turned into a recovery plan, she says. The result was a 116-page, 3.3-megabyte document of dreams that calls for, among other things, better pedestrian links in the business zone, a roof- top garden on the Lyttelton library and an investigation into parking problems.

She ticks off what has been accomplished so far: progress replacing Lyttelton's distinctive red-stone retaining walls, a $250,000 grant to help restore The Loons performance venue and money for a walkway from Godley Head to Adderley Head.

City planning unit manager Brigitte de Ronde says 22 of 31 actions in the master plan "are being progressed in part or whole this financial year". Among them was shifting the Lyttelton Farmer's Market to London St, to enhance the business zone.

Exhibit No 1 is probably the $550,000 land purchase on the corner of London and Canterbury streets, once the site of the Albion Hotel and Borough Council offices and most recently the Ground cafe. That building was demolished and the site became an early Gap Filler project.

Under the master plan, the 1262sqm, three-level, L-shaped section would become a new Civic Square, designed for public gatherings in a town with few public spaces, and possibly featuring a playground, an area for water play and public toilets.

The council is also investigating installing Lyttelton's cenotaph, currently isolated by the tunnel roundabout and damaged, in the Civic Square. Completion of the square is planned for 2014.

The Civic Square and other progressions are the sorts of things the city council can get done on its own, without seeking agreement or cash from the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, NZ Transport Agency (NZTA) or Lyttelton Port of Christchurch.

Town v port

Paula Smith, chairwoman of the Lyttelton/Mt Herbert Community Board, stands on the Oxford Street overbridge and gestures broadly at the port facilities that divide Lyttelton from the water.

There's Norwich Quay, the busy road that starts at the tunnel mouth and roundabout and proceeds like a runway to the port container facilities. Lower down, the railway travels in the same direction and broadens like a river delta into many sidings. Further over, security fences block public access to wharves 2 to 7 and the water. This is a problem.

"The community evolved with the sea and now it's completely sealed away from the sea," says Smith. She understands the town will never get a Wellington-style waterfront, with kilometres of walkways, public art and seaspray, but says "residents want to be able to eat fish and chips by the water, like they used to".

We watch heavy trucks lugging containers to and from the port at a steady rate. For residents, there are already too many trucks and it's predicted that container traffic will double in a decade. "As bad as it is now, it will be twice as bad in 10 years," says Reid.

The Lyttelton master plan calls vaguely for a "heads of agreement" between the council, port, NZTA, Environment Canterbury and KiwiRail on "alternate heavy access to the port" and terms of reference have been drafted, but this was an issue before the quakes and progress is glacial.

For Reid and Smith, the problem is the port.

"There needs to be a clear indication on what the port company intends to do, when it intends to do it and how," says Reid. "It clearly needs to be factored into the new plan. If it [the port company] has no intentions at all, then we need to know."

"The biggest problem is the port company's intransigence," says Smith. The port "makes a huge profit and some of it comes at the expense of the quality of life of the people of Lyttelton", she says.

Port company chief executive Peter Davie responds: "We're not responsible for the roading."

Norwich Quay is an NZTA- controlled state highway, he notes. "Is that a road we can get through on? Yes it is.

"People should be careful what they wish for," he says. One pre- quake plan called for a flyover from the tunnel mouth down to the port. Residents would see a flyover instead of ships - no better really.

Still, the port is an enabler, not a blocker, he says. "We're happy to work with them."

Davie counterattacks too.

"This will probably get the natives uptight," he says, but the Lyttelton master plan is "for the main street" and not much else.

Planners have not thought about what Lyttelton should be like in 15 or 20 years, considered marine industries like yachting that could populate and fund the town and waterfront, or done anything about Naval Point, the marina now largely abandoned since it broke up in a storm in 2000.

Besides, the port has problems of its own.

Port of trouble

Davie is relaxed and chatty in a phone call that ranges over port operations and plans since the quakes began. In summary, container volumes are up, log volumes are growing and income is stable.

The bad news is that coal shipments are down 15 to 17 per cent because of trouble at Solid Energy, dividends to 79 per cent owner Christchurch City Holdings are suspended and a port rebuild is coming that will likely cost several hundred million dollars, while insurance payments to date are a paltry $35.7m. Add to that a plan to reclaim 10 hectares to the east for expanded operations.

In other words, he has a huge number of things to get done and diverting traffic off a state highway and opening the waterfront to the public don't get mentioned when he lists priorities.

They are fixing Cashin Quay (the container area) and the oil and petroleum terminal area, and sorting out six of the nine wharves that need significant repairs and perhaps whole replacement. Those are a five-year project, he predicts, and made more complicated because the port has to continue to operate around the rebuild.

Asked about insurance, Davie soothes: "We're working with our insurers . . . it's a very complex process".

He insists the $35.7m insurance payout, received just months after the quake, with nothing since, is adequate for now.

"We're working with them [insurers] . . . to get it right."

When you look at a building, he says, damage can be apparent, but with wharves and seawalls, much of the critical infrastructure is out of sight. Some wharf and seawall piles stretch 40m under the seabed.

"Understanding what's going on down there is not easy," he says.

Expanding the port area to the east - about 3ha has been reclaimed to date, mostly using rubble from the demolition of central Christchurch - is not the elixir that some people imagine. For one thing, the fill will take about five years to settle before it can take the massively heavy traffic of a modern port. For another, Davie has yet to find the other 7ha of fill needed to complete the project. Supplies from town are coming to an end.

Some dream of shifting the entire port to the east and turning Lyttelton's inner harbour into a watery playground for residents.

Davie is wary. "There's not an abundance of cash for everyone's dreams," he says.

Shifting to the east is a 30-year project that might cost $0.5 billion. "That money doesn't come from nowhere."

Still, he acknowledges the community has shorter-term dreams and undertakes to work with them.

"We're working on that," he says, "but people have to realistic about a working port."

Does Davie think Lyttelton is a step ahead of other communities?

"No, it's not," he says. "There's no evidence to suggest that."

Paula Smith isn't sure either.

"I don't get a sense of urgency and getting up and running.

"Mostly, I get a sense of frustration," she says.

It's pretty much what people over the hill in Christchurch think about their rebuilds too.

Lyttelton is alive

Art joins market

A new art market launches today in Lyttelton. Promised to be modest at first, the art market will complement the long-running farmers' market and an almost equally long-running second-hand market on Saturday mornings. Organisers hope the new market will attract emerging and established artists from Lyttelton and beyond. They are looking for more than candles and knitted booties, preferring sketches, paintings and perhaps eccentric crafts such as taxidermy.

Saturday morning, corner of London and Oxford streets. Contact: lytteltonartsmarket@gmail.com

Riders up for downhill challenge

The second annual Lyttelton Urban Downhill bike takes place today. "Gravity" riders will plunge down a 1.5km course that includes steps, many jumps, banked corners made from plywood and other challenges. The fastest rider is the winner. The field includes several world-ranked New Zealanders, who will head overseas soon to compete in riding World Cup events.

Timed qualifying runs from 3.30pm; top 30 riders from 6pm. Some roads closed. Catch a bus from the gondola carpark. Free. More info: huxster.org.nz.

First steps in replacing red stone walls

Lyttelton's red retaining walls weren't up to the February and June earthquakes and Scirt is is replacing them with reinforced concrete retaining walls that can be faced later with red stone. In the "inner harbour area", which is largely Lyttelton, Scirt is scheduled to repair 210 walls that stretch about 5.8km and cover 10,284 square metres. About 3286sqm of Lyttelton walls are complete, under construction or soon to start construction.

Walls that have been deconstructed recently include Canterbury St, Ripon St, London St, and Sumner Rd. All will be refaced in the same red rock that was once there, based on pre and post-quake photos, and according to their original style, whether aztec style, block or random. They will take several years to age/weather.

- The Press

Comments