Lianne Dalziel keen for community foundation to help fund earthquake rebuild

Mayor Lianne Dalziel thinks Christchurch would benefit from having a community foundation to help with anchor project funding.

Christchurch mayor Lianne Dalziel says it was a mistake putting a government department in charge of seeking philanthropic contributions for the city's anchor projects.

She believed the task would be better handled by a community foundation, similar to those in Ashburton and many other towns and cities.

"Possibly that was the mistake at the beginning to think you could, within the context of a government department, seek philanthropic donations. Maybe it would have been better to seek to establish the foundation right from the outset," Dalziel said.

"I myself would like to leave some money to the city but you can't leave it to a council and you can't leave it to a central government agency."

The Cost Sharing Agreement signed between the Christchurch City Council and the Government in 2013 included a provision for the Government to seek philanthropic contributions for some of the anchor projects. For example, $10 million in philanthropic contributions was earmarked for the new central library. But the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority has struggled to come up with any of that money.

It has raised with the council the possibility of the two organisations creating a new entity to attract private funders for the anchor projects.

Nearly every New Zealand city had a community foundation that raised donations and handled bequests, Dalziel said, and it made sense for Christchurch to have one.

"Linking it to the Canterbury Community Trust would be a very sensible idea and maybe we could share back-office functions."

If the $10m in philanthropic contributions earmarked for the library could not be secured, Dalziel said she would prefer the council modifiy the design than delay the project.

"I don't want to see our library held up because we haven't fundraised. We might have to cut our cloth and get on with the job of building the library."

- Stuff