Library a symbol of Kaiapoi's recovery

The opening of a bold new library is a symbol of Kaiapoi's recovery, writes PHILIP MATTHEWS .

Libraries are the new temples of civic pride and community, taking the place of actual temples, or churches and cathedrals.

Everyone can agree on a library's function and value. Libraries never start dinner-table arguments.

But they are no longer just collections of dusty books or hushed rooms that kids get dragged to on wet afternoons. No longer windowless rooms where men read stacks of newspapers. Not even a place where everyone just freeloads the wi-fi.

Increasingly there is a push to double up library services with community and council services. This has been going on for a while in Christchurch - an ambitious new venue is expected to open in Halswell in November - but one of the side effects of the post-earthquake recovery is that the idea has pushed into the semi-rural areas beyond.

The architectural firm Warren and Mahoney has been driving this, just as it has been driving so much in greater Christchurch since the quakes. Architect Richard McGowan, principal at Warren and Mahoney in Christchurch, talks in a media release about the shared architectural language of new libraries at Lincoln and Kaiapoi.

They are "containers" for multilayered activity, he says. They are a built heart of the towns they occupy, and are a building heart for local residents. They are more inclusive than old-style town halls.

Yes, that is the architect speaking. But in both instances, new and better- planned civic spaces have emerged as a result. Both buildings do more than just issue books and offer spaces for silent reading. The Lincoln Library added a service centre for the Selwyn District. The Kaiapoi equivalent, which opened this week, includes a community museum as well as a service centre and art gallery.

"It's certainly a prominent building," says Waimakariri mayor David Ayers.

It is one of those times when the post- quake recovery accelerated a process that might have taken decades otherwise. The old Kaiapoi Library was becoming cramped, Ayers says. The Waimakariri District Council acted fast and approved a new library and service centre in December 2011, a little over a year after the first earthquake.

A temporary library run out of portable buildings closed on Christmas Eve.

The September 2010 quake did disproportionate damage to Kaiapoi. Twenty-two percent of residential properties were red-zoned. The general mood in 2012 was that recovery seemed to be frustratingly slow but by 2013, progress had picked up. Now Ayers is able to see the new library as not just an important milestone in its own right, but symbolic of the wider recovery of Kaiapoi.

There is the rebuilt Blackwell's department store across the road from the library on Williams St. A Coffee Culture has moved in next door.

Across the river, a new retail centre is taking shape. A skate park opened in late December. The former BNZ building that has leaned since September 2010 has a new owner who intends to restore it.

But that new library, which cost $11 million-$12m, dominates all. Stand on the bridge, on the other side of Williams St, and notice the scale of it compared to the modest single-storey retail outlets it sits amongst. The library looks like a large set of black and glass boxes with a white marquee-style roof out front creating a new communal space.

The town will grow into it. It is obviously built for the future. Is that future coming?

Gaze upwards. Notice the billboards promoting new subdivisions, replacing the 1048 houses lost to red zone clearances in Kaiapoi, Pines Beach and Kairaki Beach and adding more. There is a particular visual language to this advertising, with its images of perfect skies and happily families.

A small child runs happily with two dogs in the billboard promoting Sovereign Palms. An empty playground in a park awaits your children in the billboard promoting Silverstream Estate. "Bring the family" urges the signage at BeachGrove.

Ayers says that Kaiapoi is the fastest- growing area for building consents in the Waimakariri District, simply because of land availability. The population of Waimakariri itself has grown from about 47,000 to 55,000 since the earthquakes.

Drive east, in the direction of Pines Beach, and notice new families living amongst the day to day building noise at the BeachGrove subdivision. New houses sit in perfect lines and children ride the bikes they got for Christmas, but just past the temporary wire fences are the mountains of rubble and rows of trucks and diggers. New suburbia cannot come fast enough.

The sense of Kaiapoi as a poor cousin to Rangiora, based on some buried historical rivalry or perhaps just to do with class, is vanishing, too, as new homes are built.

"If you go to a new subdivision in Kaiapoi and then blindfold yourself and get dropped off in Rangiora, I don't think you would know where you were," Ayers says.

This leads to one other important post- quake milestone. What will they do with all that red-zone land?

That has progressed too. Following a consultation period that Ayers remembers as positive, there was a release of the "summary of findings" in December. Respondents talked of a desire for recreation and relaxation areas, from whitebaiting to community gardens to BMX to golf. Good management of the environment is an important factor, but without it being a drain on council resources.

Ayers expects Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee to make an announcement this year. But behind every idyllic plan is a dreaded question. Who pays?

There are details to be worked out with the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, Ayers says.

"It's only the beginning," he says. "There are still unanswered questions about governance and who's paying for it. I'm not saying we wouldn't have to pay for some of it, but it's quite a big area."

- Stuff