Lives before Christchurch earthquake damaged historic buildings KATE CHAPMAN

No more people will die trying to save Christchurch's historic buildings, Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee says.

Modern structures, with the exception of the 1972 CTV and 1963 Pyne Gould buildings, had stood up well during the shaky last five months; many older buildings had collapsed and claimed lives.

Renovation workers inside some of the damaged older buildings were killed during the 6.3 aftershock last week, Mr Brownlee said.

"Quite frankly people have died in this last earthquake trying to save old buildings. We're not going to do that any more. My absolutely strong position is that the old dungas, no matter what their connection, are going under the hammer."

The local council refused consent to allow some old buildings damaged in the first quake to be destroyed, but Mr Brownlee said it would not have a say this time.

"The previous method of doing things hasn't served us well, and we're not going to work with that any more.

"Old stuff, if it's got any damage at all, needs to be got down and got out, because it's dangerous and we don't need it."

Some buildings would be rebuilt to replicate the older structures and would officially be new buildings. Others would be replaced with a completely new style; that was up to the people of Christchurch, Mr Brownlee said. He did not see an immediate need to change building and earthquake codes.

He hoped to have a certain idea of what shape the central city would take within 12 months. Rebuilding should also be well under way in the suburbs by then.

"What we have an opportunity to do is determine the heritage for future generations and it should be a combination of the best practice today and getting some styles that become iconic in the future."

Historic Places Trust chief executive Bruce Chapman agreed many older buildings may be too dangerous to save. Others were repairable.

Engineers were beginning to assess central city buildings from the outside. "The indications at this point are that many of those iconic buildings are indeed repairable, including the cathedral, which is good news but that's going to take some time and there may actually be some deconstruction required first."

There was a risk of a rush to demolish old buildings, particularly in residential areas, Mr Chapman said. The Christchurch Heritage Buildings Fund was available to building owners who needed financial assistance to restore their property.

"There are some tough calls to be made there and we wouldn't want to put buildings before people, that's for sure."

The current earthquake code applied retrospectively to all buildings, and the heritage buildings with strengthening fared better than some modern buildings, Mr Chapman said.

"Where it's practicable we would really like to see those buildings carry on, particularly the iconic buildings ... that history, now, is going to be associated with survival."

But there was also an opportunity to create new history, such as was done with the art deco buildings in Napier after the 1931 quake.