Live stream: Christchurch City Council Long Term Plan meeting

The city council will not make a final decision on whether to sell assets until Friday at the earliest, says Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel.

Speaking at the start of a marathon meeting to adopt a Long Term Plan (LTP) Dalziel said the council could not make a decision on the proposed capital release programme until it had received an opinion on it from Audit New Zealand.

That opinion would not be available until Friday.

A controversial plan to raise money for Christchurch's rebuild through selling or restructuring publicly-owned assets is likely to be approved despite some strong community opposition.

Tuesday morning saw the start of a two-day meeting during which councillors must adopt a plan that maps out a financial strategy for tackling the organisation's $1.2 billion budget shortfall.

&nbsp;

Mayor Lianne Dalziel will be asking councillors to approve the phased release of up to $750 million in capital from the council's commercial assets over the next three years and to raise rates by about 27 per cent over the next four years.

She will also be asking them to put aside an extra $3m for the rejuvenation of New Brighton as part of a package of proposals aimed at addressing residents' concerns about the slow pace of recovery in the east.

While Dalziel is proposing a less aggressive capital release programme than outlined in the draft LTP, it is the most contentious aspect of the proposed budget. About 83 per cent of the submissions made to the council in relation to asset sales were opposed to them.

Assets the council owns include Christchurch International Airport Ltd, Orion, Lyttelton Port of Christchurch, Enable, Red Bus and City Care.

Council finance spokesman Cr Raf Manji said the council could release some capital from its assets without necessarily putting them up for sale.

Other options such as internal restructuring of the companies owned through Christchurch City Holdings Ltd, requiring the companies to take on more debt, or the issuing of preference shares, could all be looked at as part of the capital release programme.

"There are more options than people realised," Manji said. "Our debt profile is also a little better than we thought so we may not need to raise as much capital as we thought but for now we have to price that into the budget."

Manji said it was critical the council demonstrated to the Government that it had its finances in hand and had a clear plan for the future.

"We're sort of drawing the line under the last three or four years in financial terms," Manji said.

Cr Andrew Turner, spokesman for the six Labour-aligned People's Choice councillors, all of whom signed a pre-election pledge promising all significant public assets would be kept in public ownership and control, refused to be drawn on Monday as to whether they would support the proposed capital release programme.

Turner said they would put up a number of amendments to the budget but would not reveal what they would be seeking.

"We're working in a spirit of trying to come to a consensus on as much of this as we possibly can. Really I want the debate to take its course over the next few days rather than making any comments at the moment," Turner said.

Among those who will be watching to see if the council can get its LTP over the line is Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee, who last week expressed reservations about aspects of it to Parliament's financial and expenditure select committee.

"That plan at the moment requires them (the council) to put up rates at quite an alarming speed in my opinion. It also would require them to get some quite extraordinary prices for assets that I think are massively overvalued," Brownlee told the committee.

Brownlee said until the council had reached agreement on its LTP it was "a little difficult to work out exactly where our transition from [the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority] is going to end up".

Christchurch City councillors are being asked to approve:

- Average rate increases of 7.93 per cent this year and 6.98, 6.49 and 5.47 per cent in the following three years.

- A phased capital release programme over the first three years of the Long Term Plan that will raise up to $750 million.

- A major review of the council's capital programme to assess which projects can be deferred or removed.

- $3m over three years for regenerating New Brighton. This money is on top of the $5m already allocated for the hot salt water pools legacy project.

- $750,000 over three years for a new flood defence fund to help communities vulnerable to flooding.

- Stuff