Many quake claimants remain in EQC limbo

Almost four years may have passed but many Canterbury homeowners still need answers on their earthquake claims.

Some are back at the start, with the Earthquake Commission (EQC) transferring 744 over cap claims to insurers in the last quarter of 2014.

In 2014, private insurers settled 4447 over cap claims. They received a further 1963 over cap claims from EQC that year.

Canterbury Communities' Earthquake Recovery Network spokeswoman Leanne Curtis said the figure was appalling.

"We're not talking about houses. We're talking about families whose lives have been put on hold for four years and now they have to go through the whole process with their insurer. Who knows how many more will go over cap this year?"

The Insurance Council of New Zealand (ICNZ) releases its latest figures today, showing many claims are yet to be settled.

Insurers have yet to settle 43 per cent of a total of 23,952 over cap claims. They have settled 13,566 claims so far, 45 per cent of which were cash-settled.

The Earthquake Commission (EQC) missed its December 2014 deadline to finish its home repair programme with 3289 homes yet to be repaired.

ICNZ chief executive Tim Grafton said insurers could understand homeowners, whose claim had just reached their insurer, were frustrated.

"We have had constructive discussions with EQC and they are working hard to provide us with more clarity and certainty about the claims that will go over cap in 2015."

Grafton was confident most of the 10,386 over cap claims insurers were yet to settle would be be dealt with by the end of 2016.

"There are still some complications with claims involving multi-unit buildings, retaining walls and land issues, but private insurers are working in a concerted effort with Cera and local authorities to overcome the hurdles," he said.

The Insurance Council was developing proposals for the Government on how claims could be better managed in future.

Canterbury Home Repair Programme general manager Reid Stiven said EQC wanted every customer in the home repair programme to have their home repaired, to know when they will be repaired or to know how and when their claim will be settled, by April 2015.

Repairs would not stop in April, he said. It was the date for the home repair programme structure to wind down as it would reach the final repairs.

Fewer than 2000 homes were expected to be awaiting repair by April this year.

EQC was calling each remaining homeowner to discuss options and how to help progress their claim. It was working with Fletcher EQR and with support agencies to help resolve each individual claim.

EQC wants to give every customer certainty so they can move on with their lives and will not compromise on quality or cost to make this happen this year, it says.

To help confused homeowners progress their claim, a group led by Melanie Tobeck-Bourke will meet at the Transitional Cathedral on February 23, one day after the February 22 quake anniversary.

Experts including lawyers, an insurance advocate, engineers and a quantity surveyor will answer questions on topics including faulty foundation repairs, managing insurance claims and EQC delays.

- The Press