Marble earthquake memorial an ironic choice, says surivor

KIRK HARGREAVES/The Press The design of the Christchurch earthquake memorial wall is revealed.

A marble wall etched with the names of earthquake victim will be a feature of the official Christchurch earthquake memorial.

However, one of those seriously injured in the February 2011 quake said the choice of a "heavy object" to remember those crushed in the quakes was a surprising choice.

Slovenian architect Grega Vezjak's memorial design - formerly known as the Riverside Promenade - was picked from six shortlisted entries.

Stacy Squires Ann Brower was seriously injured when masonry crushed the bus she was on during the February 2011 earthquake.

Read more: See the six shortlisted quake memorial designs

It will include a marble wall on the Oxford Tce side of the river, near the Durham St intersection, with a row of trees. Cherry trees to honour the Japanese victims were initially suggested but no decision on the species has been made.

A bridge at the end of the promenade will connect with the north bank of the river where a smaller space will provide a contemplative place for families who lost loved ones in the quakes and others.

The winning quake memorial design features a marble memorial wall. A bridge will connect with a contemplative place for families who lost loved ones in the quakes and others. Slovenian architect Grega Vezjak's memorial wall was picked among six shortlisted designs A marble wall will be built on the Oxford Tce side of the river, near the Durham St intersection. 1 of 4 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

Ann Brower, who was the only survivor when a building facade fell onto a bus on Colombo St during the quake, said the design was beautiful but surprising.

Chosing a "tall, monolithic, heavy object" to remember people who got crushed by similarly heavy structures in the quakes had "a whimsical irony" to it.

"There will be quite a few people who, post-quake, will have a fear of things falling on them. A 3.5 metre wall might be quite intimidating."

The winning design for the quake memorial

She said the choice showed a "lack of empathy" with quake victims and survivors.

Tim Elms, whose daughter Teresa McLean died in the quake, said the families who lost loved ones in the quakes were briefed on the selected design on Tuesday evening.

"Everybody was reasonably happy with the decision," he said.

"They did take our comments on board. The whole process was very thoughtful for the families."

The memorial was initially due to be ready for the fifth quake anniversary of the February 2011 earthquake in 2016. It is now scheduled to be finished in 2017 although the contemplative space on the north bank will be finished in February 2016.

It will be created using up to $10 million from the Government and $1m from the mayoral relief fund.

Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) memorial development director Rob Kerr said the winning design was the most complext to build, hence the delay.

"Doing it too quickly means that we lose the value of the [grieving] process."

Vezjak said it was "a great responsibility and honor" to design the memorial.

"When I started the competition, I didn't really know about Christchurch except what was in the news. I did a lot of research at home.

Vezjak said his home in Slovenia was near a river "so I was capable of understanding the site and the meaning of the river".

Vezjak would work on the design mostly from home with a Christchurch-based team, as he had three young children.

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said the project would be a "stunning tribute to the victims of Canterbury's earthquakes, those who suffered through the quakes, and the courage of those who participated in the rescue and recovery operations".

"People will be able to follow the wall and take in the memories and acknowledgements of what occurred, and then cross a new pedestrian bridge to a beautiful gathering space where they can take time to reflect."

He said the project's costs could be kept under the $10m mark.

Families of those killed in the February 2011 quake and the seriously injured provided feedback on the six designs - which were chosen from more than 330 submissions - earlier this year.

Two of the six anonymous designs came from New Zealand architects, the others came from overseas.

The public then provided feedback - about 2800 submissions were made, most of which were in favour of the Riverside Promenade and another design involving a curved memorial wall.

A panel recommended The Memorial Wall as its preferred design to a memorial leadership group.

Brownlee approved the recommended design as the final choice.

Expressions of interest to build the project would close on May 18.

- Stuff