Mark Ford named rebuild chief

Daniel Tobin

John Key details the budget spending for the Christchurch recovery.

The Government expects to spend more than $2 billion on repairing Christchurch's battered infrastructure over the next year, it has revealed in a pre-Budget announcement.

Speaking in Addington today, Prime Minister John Key and Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said Canterbury's recovery was on track and starting to hit its stride.

Brownlee said the Government would spend $2.45b of the $5.5b budgeted by the end of June this year on rebuild and recovery projects.

"We are forecast to spend another $2.17b from the fund in the coming financial year as the repair and replacement of damaged horizontal infrastructure - drinking water, wastewater, stormwater and roading - ramps up and we build new infrastructure to support the growth of greater Christchurch,'' he said.

Key and Brownlee were to visit one of the city's biggest subdvisions, the Longhurst development in Halswell, which will offer 1400 sections.

Brownlee said the Government "pulled out all the stops'' to get the subdivision moving, including the fast-tracking of consents.

Aucklander to lead repairs

Watercare Auckland boss Mark Ford will head the group in charge of repairing Christchurch's earthquake-damaged infrastructure.

Brownlee said Ford would be put in charge of the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team, which has been charged with bringing the city's damaged infrastructre back to pre-quake levels.

Ford was earlier rumoured to have been head-hunted to lead the central-city rebuild project, a position that was given to Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) demolitions boss Warwick Isaacs.

Ford will be the independent chairman of the Client Governance Group (CGG), which will manage next year's $2.2b infrastructure and repair project in Christchurch and keep an eye on the rebuild.

Brownlee said Ford was qualified for the position as he led Watercare Service, was the chairman of the Auckland Transport Co and had helped with the reorganisation of local government in Auckland.

"Mark's role will be to ensure the rebuild of the city's horizontal infrastructure is timely and effective."

Brownlee said as an Aucklander, Ford would bring "independence and objectivity".

"There is an enormous work programme about to get under way across Christchurch, with new roads, pipes and water being the next key focus. The CGG will ensure this important work is delivered on time, on budget and with the support of the community," Brownlee said.

The group is an alliance of five key construction companies City Care, Downer, Fletcher Construction, Fulton Hogan and McConnell Dowell.

- The Press

Comments