Mayors unite to help Canterbury thrive

Dean Kozanic Dame Margaret Bazley, flanked by Economic Development Minister Steven Joyce, left, and Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee, explains the Canterbury Regional Economic Development Strategy at its launch on Friday.

OPINION:

Dame Margaret Bazley explains the Canterbury Economic Development Strategy, launched on Friday.

While Canterbury is a large and diverse region, there are some challenges which unite the region's rural and urban communities.

It's on this common ground that the region's mayors are standing together, and together have developed a strategy and plan of action that sets a fresh economic direction for Canterbury.

The Canterbury Mayoral Forum provided the mechanism to achieve this, and the result was the Canterbury Economic Development Strategy.

The strategy's genesis was the mayors agreeing that Canterbury must continue to forge ahead as the earthquake rebuild levels off. While the rural Canterbury economy supported the region in the aftermath of the 2010-2011 earthquakes, the rebuild has helped keep it growing.

Identifying the challenges which needed overcoming to ensure Canterbury continued to thrive, involved wide-ranging discussions with key people with a range of perspectives and experience – from education and farming, to transport and freight, immigration, infrastructure and tourism.

The seven themes which arose from those discussions, and have now been turned into the strategy's work programmes, were:

Integrated regional transport planning and Investment (led by Mayor Winton Dalley, Hurunui district).

Digital connectivity and fast broadband in rural areas (led by Mayor Damon Odey, Timaru district).

Water resources (led by Commissioner David Caygill, Environment Canterbury).

Value-added production (led by Mayor Craig Rowley, Waimate district).

Education and training for a skilled workforce (led by Mayor David Ayers, Waimakariri district).

Newcomer and migrant settlement support (led by Mayor Angus McKay, Ashburton district).

Regional visitor strategy (led by Mayor Winston Gray, Kaikoura district).

You might consider that the list the group came up with contains no surprises. However, what is new is the commitment of this region's community leaders – the city and district council mayors and the regional council – to work together to progress work in these interdependent themes across Canterbury. In this strategy, every council is involved.

What's important here is our ability to tackle issues with a Canterbury voice, and that is very powerful. We have already found that when we talk to businesses and central government with one voice, we can access opportunities that we can't on our own. As a region we are interdependent; we're working together on issues that concern all communities across the region.

At its most simple and powerful level, what we want is families to be able to live well in our rural and urban communities, with employment, thriving schools, healthcare and access to ongoing education and technology.

Population projections for the region show most districts, with the exception of Selwyn, Waimakariri and Ashburton, are growing more slowly than the national average. Unless we reverse the trend and keep those already here, and attract newcomers to the region, we risk not being able to sustain a healthy economy and services because we lack the workforce.

All our small towns need more people. In recent times Ashburton, for example, has been doing some amazing work to help families new to the district, of many different nationalities, feel at home and want to stay. This is an issue for all our rural communities and so we are working closely with central government to overcome barriers that currently exist to make sure families that do come, quickly feel part of the community and call Canterbury home.

As the rebuild levels off, great people who have come to Canterbury for work could decide to leave. We want to make sure there are good reasons for migrants and newcomers to make Canterbury their permanent home, so communities thrive.

We have an opportunity to equip people with new skills, and enable those not in the workforce to take part. We have an ageing population so helping everyone keep up with technology and other skills must be a focus.

Also important is the development of new businesses which add value to our agricultural products. Waimate has taken the lead in identifying barriers to such businesses establishing and removing barriers will be of value across the region.

It has become apparent to the Mayoral Forum that for us to achieve our goal, all seven work programmes must move ahead together. For people to gain new skills we need to provide access to education and training throughout the region. And education, new businesses, and smarter ways of farming all depend on good broadband connectivity. And an efficient, safe transport network is absolutely critical to value-added production from agricultural products, our regional visitor strategy and delivery of education and training.

We cannot leave the challenges which hold back growth in our region, believing they are somehow 'someone else's responsibility'. If it is good for the community, then the region's collective community leadership – through the Canterbury mayors – has good reason to be involved.

Some things will require funding, but the idea is to get started, get clear about what needs to be done and then work out how to get on and do it.

For example, Timaru mayor Damon Odey is leading the work programme around fast broadband. We've already met with industry representatives and lines companies are also showing interest in getting involved. Combined regional leadership has the ability to pull levers, particularly nationally, that districts individually would not be able to.

Another example is tourism: we all know how important tourism is to our economy. We have fabulous places to visit throughout the region, and lots of good people promoting them. But how much more would the region benefit if we could collectively encourage people to stay longer and enjoy more experiences – taking in Kaikoura, Hanmer, Akaroa, Aoraki-Mount Cook and the Mackenzie basin, for example.

This work is being led by Kaikoura Mayor Winston Gray, supported by the Christchurch City Council which has already done a lot of work on its visitor strategy. Christchurch must be the region's gateway – bringing people and large jets in, so the jets can in turn take our high-value, time-sensitive food exports to the world.

The Mayoral Forum is providing the leadership to keep the connections between these seven work programmes tight.

We believe Canterbury can lead the country in economic prosperity. We have the natural resources and abilities to build a strong, innovative economy, resilient communities and a great quality of life. The region's community leaders, the Mayors, need everyone's help to make it happen.

Dame Margaret Bazley is chair of the Canterbury Mayoral Forum anc chair of Environment Canterbury.

- The Press