Millennium Hotel repairable, says hotelier ALAN WOOD

Dean Kozanic CATHEDRAL SQUARE: The Millennium Hotel may be repaired while the tower section of the adjoining Heritage hotel will be demolished.

Millennium & Copthorne Hotels NZ's potential multimillion-dollar project to repair the Millennium Hotel Christchurch in Cathedral Square remains on hold.

But the hotelier has updated the status around the uninhabited hotel saying it has been "assessed as repairable" by engineers following earthquake damage in 2011.

Shareholders were told of the "repairable" status at the hotel and property group's annual meeting last week, and on Monday managing director BK Chiu said the repairable update came after talks between the building's Japanese owner and its insurers. Chiu said it would take two years of work to enable the hotel to be able to take guests.

"We are only the lessee, so it's between the owner and the insurance company, and they are in discussions. But any repairs would take, I reckon two years . . . the lease is still there, so when it is ready we will manage the hotel again."

He said work on the 179-room 5-star Millennium Hotel Christchurch could be impacted by other nearby demolitions including the next door Heritage tower building.

The hotel operator had ruled itself out of potential involvement with new hotels as part of a convention centre anchor project for the city, he said.

However, it was still interested in rebuilding its Copthorne Hotel Christchurch Central on Victoria Square but is waiting on an official decision to allow that, Chiu said.

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) and its Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) hold the key for allowing any rebuild, as does the fate of the Town Hall.

The CCDU has proposed that a performing arts precinct will be built on and around the area now occupied by the Copthorne Hotel Christchurch Central and other buildings. The hotel had been sent an initial letter from Cera noting the land would be sought for the arts precinct, but had not heard any update on Cera's plans since then. Representatives from the hotel hoped to meet with Cera to discuss the site in the next couple of weeks.

"If (the Town Hall is repaired) then the site where our hotel is will not be needed, I presume. So if it is not needed, or they don't acquire it, then we will rebuild. It will be good news for us," Chiu said. "We will find the funds for it, whether it's insurance or not."

- The Press

Comments