More than 300 EQC staff leave in a year

EMMA ALLEN EQC still has thousands of land and home claims to settle.

More than 300 staff have left the Earthquake Commission (EQC) in the last year, with one former employee blaming poor working conditions for the exodus.

Information obtained under the Official Information Act showed there had been an average of 27 resignations or employment terminations each month since September 2014.

A former EQC staff member, who did not wish to be named, said she was not surprised to hear how many people had left the organisation.

"You get really good people who come in wanting to help the people of Christchurch and improve the processes and the customer outcomes...but they get shot down over and over again and so they leave," she said.

The people who remained at EQC ended up "detached from what they are doing and work like robots", she said.

She said many staff worked in a bunker-like room and abuse from frustrated homeowners was common.

"People don't last long...it's a draining job," she said.

Staff training was often minimal or outdated, even if employees were managing complicated cases and complaints, she said.

"Most staff don't know how anything works, except for their small repetitive piece of the process, and the ones that do have any kind of overview are so snowed under," she said.

"It's no wonder claims loop around in oblivion, when they don't fit neatly into every process."

The Government department ballooned to 1800 staff after the earthquakes, and as of September 2014 had 1038 permanent and fixed-time staff.

As of this month EQC said it had just under 900 staff.

The number of resignations peaked in January and February 2015 with 37 and 41 people leaving the organisation in those months respectively.

EQC's general manager of people and capability Lynda Jelbert said staffing levels would continue to decrease over the next 12 to 18 months as EQC's "remaining tasks in Canterbury draw to a close".

"This was always to be expected and has been achieved through attrition and ensuring our teams are the correct size for the remaining work," she said.

She said EQC had filled 294 vacancies in the last financial year and had no outstanding vacancies to report.

The Minister Responsible for EQC Gerry Brownlee said he thought EQC staff were "absolutely brilliant".

"I have nothing but admiration for them, they put up with a lot and they're the front face of the organisation...and often deal with claimants who are pretty angry."

Brownlee said the number of people leaving was part of "an orderly wind down" of the organisation.

EQC still has about 4000 dwellings claims and more than 23,400 land claims to settle.

Earlier this year, it was revealed that the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) was also bleeding staff at a fast rate.

In the first six months of this year, 27 fixed-term staff had resigned ahead of their contract ending in April next year since, and seven more were shed as part of a restructure.

The Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) lost 11 employees out of 124 staff in the same period.

- Stuff