More money for fixing Christchurch's roads, pipes unlikely

Iain McGregor An independent expert has put the price of fixing Christchurch's earthquake-damaged horizontal infrastructure at $2.9 billion.

The city council's hope of getting more money from the Government for fixing Christchurch's damaged roads and underground pipes have been dealt a blow.

An independent review into the cost of fixing the city's horizontal infrastructure - the roads, footpaths, bridges and underground pipes - has concluded the $1.8 billion committed by the Government and the $1.14b from the Christchurch City Council should be enough to do the work required to restore functionality.

The cash-strapped council hoped the review by experienced Auckland civil engineer Elena Trout would support its view that more funding was needed.

The council estimated it would cost $3.2b to restore all the infrastructure, but Trout's report has concluded it would cost $2.9b, $348m less.

Trout said the lower cost was a result of several factors including efficiencies gained from "changed and evolved" design standards for wastewater, water and storm water networks, better assessment of asset damage information, rebuild efficiencies obtained by Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt) and lower than forecast inflation of construction costs.

Trout said at the time the Cost Sharing Agreement was signed only 40 per cent of the assets had been assessed.

Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel would not comment on the report until she had a chance to discuss it with Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee. No date had been confirmed for that meeting, a council spokeswoman said.

Brownlee would also not comment until he had met with Dalziel. The pair have had the report for several weeks, but have been unable to meet because Brownlee had been in Singapore, then Iraq. He then became ill, after picking up a bug on the way back to New Zealand and was now in Parliament, his spokesman said.

He was hoping to meet with Dalziel in "the next week or so".

The council has previously said if it was not able to find more money, streets in west Christchurch could go without repairs for decades because money to fix the roads and pipes was running out. Scirt has been working from east to west, so it was likely the bulk of the unrepaired infrastructure would be in the west of the city.

Councillor Yani Johanson said the report meant the city's infrastructure was not going to be fixed in a timeframe or standard that was acceptable to many people.

"The message from this is the expectation that things will be put back as they were, is wrong. What it shows, because of the agreements signed, people have to put up with getting less back than what they had before the earthquakes."

Johanson said the council would must have a good look at its infrastructure strategy in the next few months to see what it could afford to do.

"What it means for people is their roads are not going to be fixed as they were."

One of the report's conclusions included that applying a second coat of seal, which provided a thick durable layer over the road, was not eligible for funding against the Cost Sharing Agreement.

Brownlee has previously said the horizontal infrastructure network would be at least equal to what it was before the quakes and rejected the claim the council was going to be burdened with extra costs.

"It will be a long, long time before they [the council] have to start providing for maintenance on any of the work that has been done as part of the Scirt programme, " he said in December.

Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce chief executive Peter Townsend said the council and the Government needed to work together to come up with an option that would serve the best interests of the city.

"We don't want to be driving around on bumpy roads for the next 20 years that's for sure."

- Stuff