'Most amazing earthquake sights ever' NICOLE MATHEWSON

Red Bus is not the only company to cash in on Christchurch's burgeoning earthquake sightseeing market.

Red Zone Tours, a division of Christchurch Tours, is advertising Christchurch quake tours that are twice the price and twice the duration of Red Bus' central city-based version.

The tours are described as "three hours of the most amazing earthquake sights you will ever see".

They depart from outside the Canterbury Museum at 10am and 1.30pm daily and travel around Christchurch, Lyttelton and the Port Hills, including the residential red zone.

Operator Robin McCarthy said he submitted a tender to the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority to run bus tours through the cordoned central-city red zone from November 2011, but the contract went to Red Bus.

He launched an alternative service a week before the Red Bus version began, although he had been running quake tours around Christchurch since September 2010.

The attraction was not successful initially, with the bus being stopped by concerned residents six times.

"I guess it was an element of concern and sensitivity around the city to what had happened,'' he said.

''They weren't happy, so I let them explain why and then I explained my position. I was doing my best to keep my business going."

People were more open to the idea now and the tour was particularly popular with former Christchurch residents, some of whom had not been in the city for decades, he said.

"Everybody says we thought it was only the city centre [affected] because that's all we've seen on the telly. They say we just never realised the extent of the devastation. It's very sobering for them."

McCarthy said the tours were "very educational" and helped those from other parts of the country understand why their insurance premiums were rising and why some parts of the city could not be rebuilt on.

He could take between four and 51 passengers at a time, but his best day had been last Friday, when 45 passengers took the tour.

"It's very erratic in the tourism sector at the moment. You never know when the phone's going to ring,'' he said.

''This is a very, very quiet period overall. I've been hearing this from other operators too."

- The Press

Comments