New Christchurch earthquake authority to be slimmed down

DAVID WALKER/FAIRFAX NZ Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel and Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee, announce Regenerate Christchurch will take over Christchurch's quake recovery from Cera.

Christchurch's new earthquake recovery authority will be substantially smaller than its predecessor.

It is understood Regenerate Christchurch, confirmed in an announcement on Friday, will consist of about 30 staff. It will be complemented by the Christchurch City Council's newly-established development company, Development Christchurch Ltd, and a new Crown entity – CrownCo.

The mandate for the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) ends in April next year.

KIRK HARGREAVES/FAIRFAX NZ New Brighton will be a priority for Regenerate Christchurch when it assumes control of the city's quake recovery next year.

CrownCo will oversee the Crown-led anchor projects, such as the convention centre, metro sports facility and east frame, and some other objectives for Crown-owned land. It will be established under the Public Finance Act.

Even combined, Regenerate Christchurch and CrownCo will likely be much smaller than Cera. As of July, Cera had about 360 full-time and seconded staff.

"The intent is to keep it pretty lean," one source said.

READ MORE:

* Christchurch rebuild: From recovery to 'regeneration'

* Who will run the rebuild of Christchurch?

* Transition plan 'positive' for Christchurch

* Council claws back rebuild power

It is understood Regenerate Christchurch's independent board will be six-strong. Two members each will be appointed by the council and the Crown, along with the chairs of Development Christchurch and CrownCo.

The chair of the board, who will have a three-year term, will be appointed by the Crown. The council will appoint the next chair, also for three years.

Regenerate Christchurch will oversee the long-term development of the central city, the residential red zone and New Brighton and will have the ability to put together regeneration plans that carry statutory weight.

It is understood it will take on an "engagement culture", with more of a focus on public consultation and involvement.

The Greater Christchurch Recovery Bill, to set up the organisation, is expected to be introduced to Parliament next month. Details of Regenerate Christchurch's structure could change as planning continues. It is expected to be operational by April 2016.

Business leaders have welcomed the move and the shift from the government-led Cera to a power-share between the Crown and the council.

Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce general manager Leeann Watson said the collaborative model was encouraging.

"It appears to have a dual mandate both from an economic [and] public good perspective. That, I guess, has been missing in the past. It's certainly a step in the right direction."

Developer Ernest Duval said Regenerate Christchurch was a "completely different animal" to Cera and its Christchurch Central Development Unit.

"It's going to involve the council to a much greater degree and it's also going to provide a level of feedback from the community, which is essential."

The collegiality was important, he said, after the Government and the council butted heads on issues such as the proposed Victoria Square revamp and plan to restore the Town Hall.

A lack of certainty around anchor projects had hindered some central city development, Duval said.

"For instance the start date and the finish date of the convention centre, which impacts upon hotel development. Similarly, with the performing arts [precinct]. There hasn't been a flow if information as to the status of those projects.

"I think [Regenerate Christchurch] will be better."

A Cera spokesman declined to comment and referred all questions to Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee. Brownlee, who is travelling in China, could not be reached for comment.

SEASIDE SUBURB SINGLED OUT

New Brighton will come in for special attention under Christchurch's new earthquake hierarchy.

The seaside suburb was singled out in the joint Christchurch City Council-Government announcement on the structure of the city's quake recovery, which is to be led by a new entity from April next year.

Regenerate Christchurch will oversee the development of the central city, the residential red zone and New Brighton.

Mayor Lianne Dalziel said New Brighton was singled out because of the extent of the damage to the suburb and its proximity to the residential red zone.

"It is absolutely core critical that the regeneration lens is applied to New Brighton.

"This actually provides a model for delivering the outcome that the people of New Brighton have been seeking for years."

New Brighton Business and Landowners Association manager Paul Zaanen said a regeneration plan for New Brighton was crucial.

"To have another tier of support come in and from such a high level is really good for this area and it is needed. It needs a helping hand. For us it is positive, positive, positive. It is really enthusing to see people are starting to wake up . . . and make things happen. It is a huge win for this area. It is overdue and we are ready for it."

The community had come up with solutions to help the area but up until now it had not had the ability to implement them, he said.

- Stuff