New plan for Christchurch traffic flow gathers momentum

John Kirk-Anderson The speed limit on Oxford Tce will reduce to 10kmh when new traffic flow changes are implemented.

A 20-year plan to revamp Christchurch's central city road network has shifted up a gear, with three key initiatives reaching important milestones.

The Christchurch City Council's consultation process for modifications to Manchester St, Hospital Corner and the thoroughfares accessing the proposed Avon Promenade ended last week.

VIDEO: Central city travel network

Subject to the council approval, work on a $50 million segment of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority's "Accessible City" project is expected to get under way in October. The new measures should be in place by 2017.

The five-phase $76m plan, which is not scheduled for completion until 2035, features the ultimate go-slow – a 10km per hour zone along Oxford Tce from Antigua St through to Manchester St.

Cyclists and pedestrians will take precedence along the promenade, with cars expected to reduce to a trickle alongside the river.

Shared pathways will also be constructed along Cambridge Tce to benefit bicycle and foot traffic.

"We're creating a shared zone that will be transformational for Christchurch. It's a new type of street, a new type of feel," Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority anchor projects development director Rob Kerr said.

He said an efficient entry point to the central city retail area and the justice and emergency services precinct, where Oxford and Cambridge terraces and Durham and Lichfield streets converged, was imperative.

"It's a critical area for the central city, it's critical it's well designed."

Paramics, a British-designed traffic modelling system, was used to anticipate and manage vehicle flows into and around the CBD, with the emphasis on peak times.

Major changes include a short section of Durham St turning from one-way to two-way, a change that means traffic heading to the retail precinct from the west from Tuam St do not have to travel to Colombo St and then double back along Lichfield.

Lichfield St will also switch to a two-way thoroughfare; Oxford Terrace will also change direction between Antigua and Lichfield Sts.

To compensate for the Oxford Terrace's alteration Tuam St will flow one-way eastbound to improve access to the CBD past the health precinct and planned metro sports facility.

Manchester St will be landscaped to resemble a tree-lined boulevard between Armagh and Lichfield streets – it is envisaged buses will be the primary road users after this week's opening of the new bus interchange.

"We want Manchester St to be a local access road, so you only use that to get to the local area there. That allows the buses to go through," Kerr said.

Covered "super stops" for buses are planned on Manchester St, either side of the Worcester St intersection, while two are also designated for Tuam St, near Hospital Corner.

- Stuff