No compensation for home lost in quake

Monique Ford Earthquake damage in the Port hills.

Helen Kraal lost her home in the earthquakes but an insurance loophole means she won't be fully compensated.

She is among dozens of Port Hills red-zoners not allowed back in their houses after the quakes because of the threat of rockfall.

The Government red-zoned her Wakefield Ave property and the Christchurch City Council issued a Section 124 notice, which restricts entry, because of the rockfall risk.



The High Court ruled last year that the Earthquake Commission (EQC) and Allianz* did not have to pay full replacement value for the property as Kraal lost access because of the rockfall threat, not through "physical damage".

A Court of Appeal decision last week confirmed the ruling.

It was a blow to dozens of homeowners in similar situations hoping for a full replacement payout. They now have just over a week to accept a government buyout at 2007 rateable value.

The difference in settlements could total hundreds of thousands of dollars in some cases.

Insurance lawyer Duncan Webb said Kraal had been "legally deprived" of her house, a situation which was not covered by the EQC Act.

"Kraal is in no different position to someone who actually had a rock going through their house.

"They have suffered just as much, and lost just as much as other homeowners who are covered by the act."

Webb said the EQC Act should be changed.

Port Hills red zone advocate Phil Elmey said dozens of homeowners had been waiting for the appeal decision before accepting the Crown offer.

They could ask the council for funding for private rockfall mitigation instead.

He had mitigation installed privately and was still living in his house.

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) deputy chief executive social and cultural recovery Michelle Mitchell said 305 red-zoned Port Hills homes were under s124 notices.

The Crown buyout offer for them expired on February 27.

Of the 454 red zone properties in the Port Hills eligible for a Crown payout, 369 had settled. It was unclear of many of them had s124 notices.

Several insurance companies including IAG and Southern Response had paid full replacement in similar cases.

However, homeowners yet to settle their claim might not be so lucky.

IAG spokeswoman Renee Walker said it had followed legal advice on prior payouts, judging loss of access as physical loss.

These settlements would not be reviewed, but a few remaining s124 settlements would reflect the court decision.

Council chief planning officer Mike Theelen said Port Hills property owners with a Crown offer could apply to council before February 27 to mitigate rockfall and might be eligible for funding.

To date, the council had received 24 applications, had approved eight of them and was considering the rest.

Kraal's lawyer Richard Johnstone said his clients were struggling with the court's decision but reluctantly had to accept that they were not covered.

EQC declined to comment during the appeal period.

* Allianz is not connected to insurer Vero, as incorrectly stated in a previous story.

- The Press