'No justification' for bouncer headlock caught on video

Supplied GRAPHIC WARNING: Video footage supplied to Stuff shows two men remonstrating with security staff outside Orleans Bar on Lichfield St in central Christchurch on Saturday night.

A security expert says there is "no justification" for the conduct of bouncers who rendered two men unconscious outside a Christchurch bar.

Police should investigate, he said.

Video footage supplied to Stuff shows two men arguing with security staff outside the Strange's Lane bar precinct on Lichfield St on Saturday night.

Two patrons left unconscious after being restrained by two Christchurch security guards.

After several minutes, the exchange becomes more heated and a bouncer places one of the men in a headlock. When his friend intervenes he is thrown to the ground, prompting groans from onlookers. Both men appear to lose consciousness and are put in the recovery position.

After viewing footage of the incident, New Zealand Security Association director of training Stewart O'Reilly believed the actions of the security staff were inexcusable.

O'Reilly, whose organisation is the largest in the sector, said: "that is clearly assault. There's no way that's justifiable. Good grief."

O'Reilly said security staff could use limited force in self defence or if someone who had been ejected from a bar tried to re-enter.

"Even if it's self defence, there are three large bouncers. I can't see any justification for what happens there.

"You'd think police would want to investigate this."

A Strange's Lane manager confirmed there was an incident with security staff on Saturday night after two patrons had been asked to leave the bar. He declined to comment further.

Police were called to the incident. It is understood the men spent the night in custody before being released. They did not suffer serious injuries. It did not appear that a complaint had been laid.

Inspector Derek Erasmus, of Christchurch police, said he could not comment on the incident without a complaint or knowledge of what happened.

"I would encourage anyone who feels they've been assaulted to come into the police station so that we can look at what evidence is available. If we're not aware of it there isn't a lot we can do."

St John spokesman Ian Henderson said an ambulance was called to the scene at 12.20am, but was stood down soon after as the participants were being cared for by police.

The two patrons declined to comment.

READ MORE:

* Casino bouncers' actions caught on video

* Complaints laid over broken arms in Christchurch Casino fracas

- Stuff