No significant asbestos risk after Canterbury earthquakes

Flawed management of asbestos following the Canterbury earthquakes did not pose significant health risks, a scientific review has found.

The report by the Prime Minister's chief science advisor, Sir Peter Gluckman, and the Royal Society of New Zealand was released on Wednesday.

Gluckman said residents should be assured that any brief exposure to asbestos would be unlikely to increase the risk of asbestos-related diseases.

"It will also reinforce the importance of taking adequate precautions when working with asbestos-containing materials during building renovations," he said.

Early work in the Canterbury Home Repair Programme was criticised for not managing asbestos risk.

A WorkSafe investigation last year found flaws in the management of asbestos but did not lay charges.

Asbestos products were used in many New Zealand houses built between 1940 and 1990 including in roofing, wall cladding and decorative textured ceilings or walls.

If left undisturbed, these asbestos-containing materials are generally considered harmless but exposure is increased during repair or removal.

The risks can be managed with protective gear and appropriate procedures, such as wetting the surface to reduce dust.

The report used a simulation study to determine levels of exposure generated using sub-optimal procedures.

It aimed to simulate the "worst case" scenario that had been carried out in Christchurch for the first year after the earthquakes, before stricter procedures were implemented.

Specialist contractors worked for three days in each of three damaged Christchurch homes removing textured coating.

Exposure to asbestos fibres during the simulation was well below workplace standards, so the report's authors concluded that the risk to occupants would have been extremely low.

Royal Society of New Zealand president Sir David Skegg said there was no evidence that a single peak in exposure would have a "material effect on disease risk".

He said there should not be complacency about managing the risks for people working with asbestos.

"Homeowners must approach renovations with caution."

Although New Zealand no longer manufactures asbestos-containing materials, some materials may still be imported.

"New Zealand should follow the example of other developed countries and ban the importation of all building materials containing asbestos," Skegg said.

A public meeting will be held to explain the report's findings on May 1, 6pm, 2 Riccarton Ave (Rolleston Lecture Theatre, University of Otago, Christchurch campus).

What is asbestos?

- Asbestos refers to a group of naturally-occurring fibrous silicate minerals once widely used in building construction. It was dubbed the "miracle mineral" for its strength and fire-resistant qualities.

- Unprocessed asbestos was imported into New Zealand from the 1930s. Building products composed of asbestos mixed with cement were produced up until the mid-1980s.

- Numerous asbestos-containing materials remain in older buildings, including cement roofing, external cladding, internal wall linings, textured ceilings, vinyl flooring and insulation around pipes and hot water heaters.

- It has been linked to health issues including asbestosis (scarring of the lungs), lung cancer and mesothelioma - an aggressive cancer of the mesothelium which lines several organs including the lungs and heart.

- Stuff