No surprises in new quake recovery plan - Mayor

STACY SQUIRES/FAIRFAX NZ Waimakariri district mayor David Ayers said a new plan for the earthquake recovery would be unlikely to change much.

The announcement of a new earthquake recovery plan for the central city rebuild is unlikely to have a big effect on Waimakariri, the mayor says.

Prime minister John Key announced on Thursday the formation of a new entity named Regenerate Christchurch, which would replace the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) when it dissolves in April next year.

New legislation would also replace the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act, which would formalise the transition of Cera's functions to local authorities.

It would last five years from April, and would ease the region into a full transfer of power from the government to councils.

Key said the plan would "help speed things up" and Regenerate Christchurch would function like an urban development authority.

Waimakariri district mayor David Ayers said he was still processing the announcement, but believed it wouldn't have a big effect on the district.

"From a Waimakariri point of view, the movement of the functions of Cera to government departments is something we expected as a council, because we knew Cera was disappearing at the end of April next year," he said.

"I don't think there will be too much affecting us or changing for us. We await the final recovery plan… what's been announced is a draft recovery plan, which is going out for public consultation, so there will be another stage to this particular document."

He said a report by the transition advisory board, which made recommendations to the government on the transition plan, endorsed the need for strong local leadership to pave a way forward for the region.

Waimakariri MP Matt Doocey welcomed his party's proposal.

"Regenerate Christchurch will restore confidence in greater Christchurch, working in tandem with councils and stakeholders to fulfil a vision for our region that we, as one Canterbury, endorsed," he said.

"This new legislation signals a new direction for Canterbury post recovery that will cement in our region as a bold new place to live, work and raise families in."

Christchurch mayor Lianne Dalziel threw her support behind the plan, and said she had "no reservations" about what was proposed.

Opposition came from Labour earthquake recovery spokeswoman Ruth Dyson, who said the new entity appeared to be "just Cera with a new name," and that the recovery had been too slow.

The plan would go out for public consultation, with feedback due by July 30.

- Stuff