NZ 'to go without' to fund rebuild ASHLEIGH STEWART

John Key's dismissal of Cantabrians' "micro-level hard-luck stories" has drawn fury from locals.

The prime minister also warned that New Zealanders would have to ''go without'' so money could be put into the Canterbury rebuild.

Speaking about yesterday's Budget on Campbell Live last night, Key asked ''New Zealanders right across the country actually to go without so that money can go into Christchurch as a priority''.

He said: ''At a micro level, yes, there are always hard-luck stories and they are very genuine, but I think you've also got to take a step back and say at an overall level, because it's not always possible to address every single point, and when you look at precedent risk and everything else, the Government really has truly stepped up."

Christchurch City councillor Glenn Livingstone was ''staggered'' by Key's comments.

''He is totally trying to minimise the whole Christchurch situation,'' he said.

''What I'm picking up is he's saying, 'Well, Christchurch, you should be grateful'. Of course Christchurch is grateful, but there's no need to say that.''

The Government's money was not being wisely spent either, he said, as it was focused on ''imposing very expensive projects'' on the city.

''We do need these economic drivers, but we also need to fix people's homes.''

Livingstone called on Key to retract his comment and said he was sure ''he didn't intend to say it''.

''People are quite aware in Christchurch of how insensitive that comment is,'' Livingstone said.

Public relations consultant and former broadcaster Ali Jones, who has faced a lengthy battle with the Earthquake Commission of her own, said she was ''incensed'' by Key's comments.

''Where we find ourselves now isn't a case of bad luck; it's a result of poor management, particularly at central government level,'' she said.

''And to make Cantabrians going through all these issues, like stress and pain ... as though they are taking food out of the mouths of starving children, which is essentially what he's saying, is, quite frankly, bloody rude.''

Jones believed the comment could be another case of Key needing to ''pick his words more carefully'' after a comment where he called Wellington a''dying city'' caused an uproar.

''He may have picked his words badly but, quite frankly, that's not good enough. I get the impression from what he's saying is that there's no huge problem here,'' she said.

Christchurch Mayor Bob Parker said he did not consider the remarks ''a big deal'' and ''there may be a degree of truth to it''.

''I guess he's in a better position to know that then we are. It's his Budget and they are making those decisions,'' Parker said.

''I'm looking at it as we are really driving the New Zealand economy through the rebuild, and that's got positive benefits for everybody.

''We're actually giving more in the economy than we are taking.''

- The Press

Comments