Obama tells Key 'the US stands ready'

LUKE APPLEBY/Dominion Post SAD DAY: John Key addresses the national following the devastating Christchurch earthquake.

United States President Barack Obama has told John Key the US is ready to provide any further help needed in the Christchurch earthquake recovery effort.

Key and Obama spoke on the phone for about five minutes just before midday in a conversation requested by US leader.

"The President asked about ongoing aftershocks and reiterated that the United States stood ready to provide further help, should New Zealand need it," a spokesman for Key said.

"The Prime Minister thanked the President for the offers of help made so far by the United States, and told him of the Government's determination to rebuild the city."

A 75-strong specialist urban search and rescue team from the US is among more than 600 overseas emergency personnel helping search for survivors in the rubble and restore infrastructure.

The call came after Key announced he was reshuffling the Cabinet in the wake of the earthquake.

Gerry Brownlee will drop all his other ministerial portfolios to focus on the quake recovery effort.

The move, announced after Key emerged from the latest emergency Cabinet meeting, would allow Brownlee to concentrate solely on rebuilding the city after the devastating quake, which has killed around 75 people.

Key said he had also met Police Commissioner Howard Broad this morning to discuss the release of the names of people killed in the earthquake, and some were expected to be publicly identified this afternoon.

There may have been fatalities from quite a number of countries, Key said.

Broad had also agreed to ensure that accurate and up-to-date lists of people who were reported missing and feared to have been killed or trapped in the rubble would be prepared by this afternoon.

Some reports have put the number missing at up to 300, but Key said this morning that there was significant confusion around the accuracy of the lists.

Key said the Government was also working urgently to get details on the extent of the damage, including how many homes had been hit and how many claims might be expected.

The number of uninhabitable homes could be greater than the last quake, which numbered 3000.

The Government was also looking at a business assistance package that would be broader and of "a slightly different nature" to the last quake package.

Key would be returning to Christchurch this afternoon.

DEATH TOLL 'WILL RISE'

Key earlier said the death toll from the earthquake would rise and New Zealand must brace itself.

He defended police who have described their efforts as a recovery operation.

Search teams were using dogs and a number of techniques to determine if there were sounds or signs of life under the rubble.

"They're not getting positive signs."

Key said that did not mean there would not be people who had survived building collapses.

"People can survive for a very long time without food or water."

He said New Zealand could not give up hope, but needed to be realistic.

Key said he flew over the CTV building yesterday and said it was in an "extraordinary bad state".

He defended the police decision to pull rescuers out of there yesterday and said while the wait to get in and search for survivors was agonising, the lives of searchers could not be put at risk.

"We just have to trust them. They absolutely will go in when they can."

Key, who was raised in Christchurch said he understood the frustration of people who wanted to know the fate of loved ones.

"I myself have got one or two people that I think might be missing, and I'd personally like to know the status of them."

He said the people were friends, not family, and he had heard through his sister that they were missing.

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

The focus today for those on the ground and the Government would be critical infrastructure.

"It's critical from a health perspective to get water and power restored."

Key said he and Finance Minister Bill English would have a conference call with 40 private sector chief executives to discuss how the commercial sector would respond and cope with the disaster.

A number of large companies were inside the cordoned off area and questions still needed to be answered about how they would begin to operate again, and where they would work from, Mr Key said.

The air force had flown 30 generators to Christchurch to help restore telecommunications.

Key said there had been no discussion about the Government levying all taxpayers to help pay the bill as Australia did after the Queensland floods.

ECONOMY 'WILL SURVIVE'

Key said this morning New Zealand's economy would survive the impact of the earthquake.

"We can afford to take the hit and we can cope with this as a country."

Insurance levies had built up a kitty of about $7 billion, he told TV1.

Although a lot of that would be consumed by the earthquake, the Crown also had the capacity to make payments.

A downgrade in New Zealand's credit rating was not expected.

While the rebuilding in Christchurch after the September 4 earthquake had been expected to add about 1 per cent to New Zealand's GDP this year, that would now be delayed.

Economic activity in Christchurch would be a lot less for a while, but Key said the economy would survive.

"We just have to accept sometimes we're dealt a pretty bad hand of cards."

- By TRACY WATKINS, KIRAN CHUG and MARTIN KAY

- Stuff