Pace of Christchurch rebuild slowing ALAN WOOD

Canterbury economic activity is at a high level but the pace of growth in the earthquake-related rebuild has eased, a bank survey shows.

This slower growth may indicate bottlenecks are starting to emerge in the Canterbury rebuild process, the bank says.

Business and building sector leaders were yesterday quick to play down any concern about a potential slowdown in the recovery, saying the bulk of the $40 billion rebuild was to be funded by insurance companies and was yet to be spent.

Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce chief executive Peter Townsend said the first quarter of 2014 would see a pickup in activity and anyone "who thinks we've plateaued out is absolutely in la la land . . .

"The reality is we haven't started the recovery yet for all intents and purposes."

A monthly ASB "Cantometer" indicator, released today, showed activity remained steady over the last quarter, but "indications are the pace of growth may be starting to slow".

ASB chief economist Nick Tuffley said growth in building consents appeared to have stalled, after lifting strongly over the past year. The Cantometer indicator had remained steady at a relatively high reading of 1.0 in October for the third consecutive month.

The trend in building consents suggested construction activity would soon start to level off, although at high levels, he said.

"The recent results raise the question: are the flat results due to a temporary lull in activity before the upward trend resumes, or a larger issue where bottlenecks may be starting to impact?"

However, ASB did expect to see consent issuance to pick up over time. "Certainly we don't think Canterbury is anywhere near its peak level of building activity yet."

Registered Master Builders chief executive Warwick Quinn said he did not see the rebuild reaching a plateau.

Most builders were reporting they were busy though some were being impacted by the introduction by the Reserve Bank restrictions on high loan-to-value ratio mortgages.

"Some builders aren't impacted at all. Other builders are significantly affected," Quinn said.

Townsend said there were three things causing the "lull" including the slow issue of some consents, issues about getting access to central city land for investment and insurance payouts.

"The third one is probably the most significant driver. I've been told by the deputy governor of the Reserve Bank that of the $40b cost of the disaster in Christchurch, between $32-35b is insurance," he said.

"That's what is driving the recovery. What we're seeing right now is a bit of a lull as insurance issues are sorted."

However, those insurance companies were going "flat out" to resolve those issues, at the behest of the giant international reinsurers.

This would lead to "an avalanche of work" once consenting and other issues were resolved, Townsend said.

For example, he had banked insurance money for his own Fendalton-Merivale home nearly three months ago but the rebuild was still in the consent process.

There was still a huge amount of residential work to do with the Fletcher EQR programme only half way through $3b of repairs on 90,000 homes.

The total residential rebuild had been estimated at $24b or 60 per cent of the $40b total by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, with most of the over $100,000 cap or non-Fletcher EQR work yet to be done.

"The insurance industry will tell you quite openly now there are 25,000 houses in that (overcap) category. Of those houses 700 have been repaired or are under repair . . . we're still got 24,300 to go."

- The Press

Comments