Panel gives go-ahead to rebuild GEORGINA STYLIANOU

The owners of a hotel, an office block and a shopping development have been given approval to replace earthquake-destroyed Christchurch buildings.

Peter Knight, of the Latimer Hotel in Gloucester St, has been granted resource consent with limited notification by a Christchurch City Council hearings panel.

The plans include turning Knight's former home at the Gloucester St site into a car park. The new hotel would be built in blocks and not exceed five storeys.

"The old hotel was seven storeys, so there's no issue with affecting what neighbouring properties overlook," he said.

Panel commissioner Ken Lawn said he was concerned about "possible adverse effects" on neighbours.

"Even though this site has always been a hotel, it is still in a residential area ... and I'm wondering what the effects of these changes will be," he said.

It was agreed the effects would be minor.

Council planner Marcus Blayney said the panel's decision would be finalised this week. However, Knight told The Press he had been granted consent on the condition that neighbours did not have any issues with the plans.

"They've given it limited notification, which means direct neighbours have 20 days to make a submission on the plans," he said.

Knight's business interruption insurance ends in February and consent would allow him to rebuild his family's business of 40 years.

The panel granted resource consent for two other projects.

Latitude Group, which owns six sites in Christchurch, will develop a seven-storey building on the site of the former St Elmo Courts.

The building, on the corner of Hereford and Montreal streets, was destroyed in the February earthquake and has since been demolished.

Athfield Architects, which designed the Christchurch civic building in Hereford St, has designed the building.

A Latitude Group spokesman said the building would house retail outlets on the bottom floor.

"There will be office space on the other floors," he said.

Pharmacy chain Amcal had expressed an interest in occupying the building, he said. "We're in negotiations at the moment."

The building would be about 30 metres high.

Plans to redevelop the Merivale shopping precinct were also given the green light. A two-storey building would be built on five sites in Papanui Rd that used to house boutique shops, a pharmacy and a restaurant.

Council senior planner Nathan O'Connell said two property owners had decided to join forces. "The building will run from 196A to 202 Papanui Rd and will be used for retail purposes."

He said that like many Christchurch suburban centres, parking was "not ideal".

"But I'm very happy with the application and I think it would be good to get Merivale back up and running again," he said.

- The Press

Comments