Panoramic views captured inside central-city cordon Father-son team's virtual tours of city centre CHARLIE GATES

STACY SQUIRES/Fairfax NZ CATHEDRAL SQUARE: Murray Quartly and his son, Liam, have taken photographs of 17 red-zone sites. The virtual tours use 360-degree camera technology to capture Christchurch earthquake scenes.

Virtual tours of the central Christchurch red zone are being offered by a Canterbury photographer who has captured panoramic views from behind the cordon.

See the pictures by clicking here.

Photographer Murray Quartly has used special camera equipment and software to create panoramic views of 17 red-zone sites that online users can pan and zoom to see the state of the central city.

Interactive images were created this month for Cathedral Square, Victoria Square, Colombo St and the former sites of the Canterbury Television and Pyne Gould Corporation buildings.

Quartly plans to return to the same sites every six months to create an evolving snapshot of the rebuild.

"I want to see the phoenix rising from the ashes of all the quake damage. It is changing already," he said. "The only disappointment is I wasn't able to get in there earlier and photograph it when there were more buildings and rubble. That would have been a good start.

"This will continue over a long time; until the CBD is rebuilt. They are talking about 15 years.

"It will be an interesting contribution to Christchurch. I want to show people what happened and what it's like and what will be rebuilt."

The panoramic images are created with a digital camera using a fish-eye lens and a special tripod mount. Several images are taken at each site and then stitched together using special software.

Quartly takes panoramic images for his part-time family business, Focus360, but the red-zone images are being made for free. They will be donated to the CEISMIC digital archive of quake material.

Archive project manager James Smithies, of Canterbury University, said the panoramas would be available through a planned search function.

The search will scan quake material held by institutions including the university, Christchurch City Libraries, Canterbury Museum, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, NZ on Screen, the Ngai Tahu Research Centre and Te Papa. The National Library and the Ministry for Culture and Heritage are also involved in the project.

"The idea is to create a place where present and future New Zealanders can go for high-quality earthquake-related content, and to foster a spirit of collaboration between participating organisations and community providers to ensure that digital quake content remains available in perpetuity," Smithies said.

- The Press

Comments