Parking crucial in Christchurch redevelopment

It is unfortunate an issue as mundane as car parking has become the focus of one of the most exciting parts of Christchurch's redevelopment.

Mundane it may be, but the parking debate is crucial.

Retail precinct landowners have, for more than three years, been lobbying the Christchurch City Council and the Christchurch Central Development Unit about the importance of ensuring that the heart of the city is accessible.

Both the Crossing car park and Lichfield St car park suffered extensive damage in the quakes, wiping out the majority of public car parking in the city's retail core. It is a complicated situation compounded by multiple engineering reports, insurance negotiations, bureaucracy, tensions between the Crown and the council and civic financial instability.

After a deal had been on the table for months, the council sold the Crossing car park to the Carter Group, in exchange for a managed demolition and the promise of a new 534-space building.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee later decided to use his extraordinary powers to fast-track the car park's redevelopment and skip over complex consenting issues, despite the council asking him not to. Brownlee said the council was making the project too difficult, while the council said it was merely acting as the city's consent regulator.

The new building will mainly service the Carter Group's $100 million retail development, but on the western side of Colombo St, the fate of the Lichfield St car parking building is still unknown.

The council is being asked to facilitate the replacement of what was already there pre-quake - which seems a reasonable request - whether by insurance proceeds alone (likely not possible) or by public-private partnership.

It has already taken too long.

A decision about what will replace the facility may not be made until demolition is completed, which is several months away.

The end of 2016 is pinned as the ultimate deadline.

This is when thousands of workers, shoppers and visitors will once again pour into the CBD. It will be touch-and-go whether the council is able to pull something out of the bag in time but what is certain is a gridlocked CBD with no parking options will spell disaster.

- The Press