READER REPORT: Post-earthquake Christchurch 'occupied territory' CHRIS BROWN

DEAN KOZANIC/Fairfax NZ STILL WAITING: 'There are places the population of a region might care about more deeply than non-residents, for example, Cathedral Square, Cave Rock in Sumner, the New Brighton pier, or the Bridle Path.'

Four years goes very quickly. At first, for many a Cantabrian, we thought it would never end. With multiple quakes each day, news reports and inquiries, salutes to the deserving heroes, and of course the demolition and rehabilitation works, every day was a trial for those who were attempting to move on. The dissipation of the earthquakes was a relief, and still is. The people, however, are left with an aftermath of disenfranchisement.

Some suggest the only two places which have undertaken an infrastructure rebuild on a similar scale as Christchurch is post-invasion Baghdad and pre-2012 Olympics London.

For me, the post-disaster Christchurch is more comparable to post-WW2 occupied Berlin.

The city is now occupied territory, with multiple factions from external forces taking opposing positions, with the residents caught in the middle.

Cera (Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority), Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt), Environment Canterbury (ECan), New Zealand Transport Agency, Earthquake Commission, Central Christchurch Development Unit, insurers and loss adjusters, and international investors (governments and conglomerates) now interact, and fail to interact, to determine the Christchurch Central Recovery Plan, the Land Use Recovery Plan, anchor projects such as a new stadium, precincts, demolition of privately owned buildings, and the red zoning of privately owned properties.

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act allows CERA to circumvent many restrictions of the Resource Management Act and Historic Places Act and it's replacement, the Heritage New Zealand Pouhere Taonga Act of 2014, effectively limiting external scrutiny.

They can conduct any work without applying for consent.

CERA and Scirt were given termination dates of 2016, but with projects poorly designed and delays to the key projects such as the Avon River precinct, the likelihood of these project teams dissolving as planned seems like wishful thinking.

Regardless, the powers of CERA, which include overruling property owners wishes to save their property, will not revert to the City Council in 2016, but rather to the Office of the Prime Minister.

READ MORE:

* A son so sadly missed

* 'I thought you were dead, Mum'

* 'Seconds later all hell broke loose'

So what?

The simplest answer is the cost of the projects these external parties engage in on the city's behalf.

At present, the Christchurch City Council has limited powers to control the projects which it is forced to pay for. These decisions will be made by CERA and CCDU, and from 2016 the central government.

Aside from money, there are places the population of a region might care about more deeply than non-residents, for example, Cathedral Square, Cave Rock in Sumner, the New Brighton pier, or the Bridle Path.

It's worth noting city councillors were not capable of overseeing a major rebuild on the scale required since 2011, and that resources and expertise from outside Christchurch were desperately needed.

The question is that at present, the population is suffering taxation without representation. When a major proportion of the city opposes particular projects being undertaken by CERA, it must be questioned when the people's voices will be considered.

It makes sense that in a crisis, that central government should temporarily take control. Temporarily.

That is not what has happened with Environment Canterbury (ECan). The commissioners took control in May of 2010. At this stage, there is no intent to return ECan control to the people of the region.

And there is no plan indicated by the National government to return power to the Christchurch City Council.

Cera has the power to instruct any works on a large proportion of central city sites with no consent required, and no recourse allowed from the CCC. They have effectively acquired land to do with it whatever they choose with the public funding attained by a population which cannot legally intervene

With the ability to operate carte blanche, Cera's construction on anchor projects began, and halted, and underwent design changes, and incurred additional costs, and began again. With their infrastructure affected by these works, operators like Orion and Chorus have used the rebuild works as an opportunity to upgrade their assets and charge these costs to Cera, that is, the CCC, that is, the ratepayer.

The question over whether rates, which have increased by beyond 40 per cent for some property owners, should be raised again to help pay for these projects, or if CCC assets should be sold.

If the council sold shares in the airport, for example, to pay for new constructions, like a stadium, they would be diversifying their investments, remaining in control of their enterprises and have new assets in the process.

The fact remains though, that the risk in those investments lie with the city and not Cera or the central government, hence it should be the city's right to invest as it sees fit.

Comments