Preparing for life after the rebuild

Dean Kozanic The Canterbury Regional Economic Development Strategy launch saw Economic Development Minister Steven Joyce alongside Environment Canterbury chair Dame Margaret Bazley and Minister for Earthquake Recovery, Gerry Brownlee

Canterbury political and business leaders gathered on Friday to plan for continued economic health and growth in the region as the rebuild peaks.

In the years ahead Canterbury has the ability to keep attracting hard working migrants say supporters of a new economic development strategy, including influential Government ministers.

Behind the Canterbury Regional Economic Development Strategy is Canterbury's Mayoral Forum. The forum comprises 10 territorial authority mayors, and Dame Margaret Bazley, chair of regional council Environment Canterbury.

Dean Kozanic Canterbury Regional Economic Development Strategy saw Jim Palmer representing a council chief executives forum.

Bazley and the mayors spoke at the official launch on a seven-pronged strategy.

Water, tourism and migration have been picked as important areas to keep economic activity in the region on the up.

"We (the mayors) are all working together to a shared vision ... (under a) dynamic document, it's not static," Bazley said.

Economic Development Minister Steven Joyce raised the idea that some Cantabrians were worried about the future of the region particularly as the rebuild slowed but he said it was not a concern.

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee, in particular, rebuffed the notion of a slowdown, and Joyce indicated extra rebuild participants would be needed.

Immigration settings might be again altered to keep the Canterbury rebuild fuelled.

"We're setting up a project in the South Island, where people that have been skilled workers for a while, can convert and get a pathway to residency ."

"We made it a South Island thing because the labour shortage is more acute (here) ...," Joyce said.

"We've (also) recognised that probably the immigration settings for the South Island have to be more positive than the North Island currently." Immigration settings could be further tweaked.

Joyce said Canterbury was responsible for 13.1 per cent of New Zealand's economic output and that percentage should grow as it emerged as a stronger and more resilient 21st Century regional economy.

"We're actively looking beyond recovery and looking at the sustained development and growth of the Canterbury economy over the next several years."

While the rebuild had helped build a construction workforce of 31,000, including migrants, it was a time for the engine room of the South Island to look ahead, Joyce said.

"Of course we now have the doomsayers saying, well what are those 31,000 people going to do at the end of the rebuild, it's all going to be a disaster and the end of the world.

"But actually what is going to happen is the economy is going to move into a new phase, where we harness the skills and the opportunities and vitality that workforce brings and really build a very strong economy."

The region had the resources and skills development places such as the universities of Canterbury, Lincoln and polytechnics to join with innovative companies, Joyce said.

Brownlee saud the residential side of the rebuild might start to flatten out, "but you can't bring the number of people who have come into the Canterbury economy in the last three or four years and look to be too pessimistic." .

In the commercial sector there was an enormous amount of work to be done and that would continue over some time.

Creating a skilled workforce is seen as important at a time when Canterbury's population is older and ageing at a faster rate than the rest of New Zealand's population.

It also has the lowest unemployment which may mean a shortage of skilled workers in the future.

Retaining skilled migrants and their families and helping them integrate into local communities is seen as important.

Joyce said while migrants were important Canterbury "should (not) be too proud, I think you should be prepared to take on North Islanders as well".

The seven main platforms are individually being led by chosen mayors. For example the regional visitor strategy is being led by Winston Gray and the Kaikoura District Council, with support by Christchurch City Council.

The mayors see one way to encouraging more tourism is to ensure Christchurch remains the gateway for the region and the South Island. Attention needs to be paid to infrastructure such as accommodation and convention facilities.

Destinations such as Kaikōura, the Mackenzie Basin, Hanmer Springs and Akaroa need further support.

There were initiatives needed to draw tourists in, including the better provision of free wifi spots in small towns to enable tourists to access the internet, Gray said.

Supporting the mayors has been a Canterbury chief executives forum. Chair Jim Palmer (also chief executive of Waimakariri District Council) has been working on the seven strategies, one of which is transport.

The ability to keep the region moving is seen as important, particularly as 91 per cent of South Island freight is moved by road, putting pressure on the region's 14 state highways. The mayors want to integrate transport planning.

Joyce said the mayors' strategy in the months and years ahead would be supported by the Crown.

"You have our commitment that Government agencies will work alongside you in order to remove those blockages and encourage growth in Canterbury," Joyce said.

New workers for Canterbury could take both the form of both migrants and those north of Cook Strait, though so far North Islanders had proved reticent, the minister said.

Canterbury's population was ageing and population growth rates were projected to be as low as zero to 2.2 per cent, meaning inward migration was a necessity, the mayors said.

Palmer said one of the infrastructure requirements the region needed was digital connectivity. This included fast broadband and reliable cellphone coverage. For example fast data transfer was needed for modern farming techniques including monitoring soil moisture, irrigation control, and fertiliser application.

Fresh water management was a key for agriculture and another part of the strategy. Progress would be measured, Palmer said.

"With our partners like the Canterbury Development Corporation we will be looking develop a dashboard of indicators which assesses our progress and informs future decision making, " Palmer said.

Canterbury facts and figures

Population of Canterbury: 574,300

91% of freight moved by road, 7% by rail, 2% shipped

45,000 square kilometres

0.9% is Canterbury's projected annual population growth

6,800 new jobs in manufacturing in the last year

3.3% unemployment in Canterbury (5.9% NZ-wide)

31% growth of Canterbury economy in past 5 years

13.1% contribution of the national GDP

$153 billion is the capital value of Canterbury properties

- Stuff