Press readers: your chance to vote CHARLIE GATES

A Press survey of more than 350 readers ask about the Cathedral's future, to rate our city's leaders, priorities our rebuild and tell us about their future plans. What do you think? Have your say in our online polls.

A scientific survey commissioned by The Press has found the majority of Canterbury residents do not want to spend public money saving the building or running the temporary cardboard cathedral.

The survey was split with 54 per cent favouring demolition and 42 per cent calling for it to be saved.

People who favoured demolition said they were concerned about safety, the extensive earthquake damage to the building and the cost of repairs.

Safety, structural and land concerns were cited by 39 per cent of those polled.

The cost of restoration and the belief the cathedral is too damaged to remain were cited by 19 per cent of respondents.

In a separate question respondents were asked about the performance of city leaders. Student Army founder Sam Johnson topped the poll with a staggering 98 per cent considering he had done a good job.

Cera chief executive Roger Sutton was thought to have done a good job by 81 per cent of those surveyed while Prime Minister John Key was believed to be doing a good job by 74 per cent and Labour earthquake spokeswoman and Christchurch East MP Lianne Dalziel by 73 per cent.

Christchurch Mayor Bob Parker was given the thumbs up by 63 per cent Christchurch Central Development Unit director Warwick Isaacs' performance was rated "good" by 62 per cent.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee's performance polarised the survey group, with 52 per cent saying it had been good but 44 per cent considering it poor.

City council chief executive was given a poor rating by 65 per cent, while Bishop Victoria Matthews was given the thumbs down by 44 per cent.

What do you think? Vote in our poll on who you think is the best performer.

In a question about key agencies, respondents said government agencies, and not the Christchurch City Council, should manage the central-city rebuild.

Just under half (49 per cent) said the Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) arm of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) should be in charge of the rebuild, while only 21 per cent thought it should be the job of the city council.

A quarter of the sample, 91 recipients, said "others" should be leading the charge.

Of those "others", 33 people said it should be a combination of the CCDU-Cera and the council, and 13 said it should be the "people of Christchurch".

- The Press

Next Our Rebuild: Your Views story: Rates relief divisive issue The Press Homepage

Comments