Public asked to stay away from Christchurch police station implosion

stuff.co.nz Here's how it looked when the Radio Network building was imploded in Christchurch in 2012.

Spectators keen to watch Christchurch's old central city police station fall are being asked to stay away.

The earthquake-damaged Hereford St building, which is owned by Ngai Tahu Property (NTP), has been slated for demolition by implosion since last year but no date has been set.

READ MORE: Interactive panorama of Christchurch CBD

John Kirk-Anderson/FairfaxNZ The former Christchurch Central Police Station will be demolished by implosion. The public is being asked to stay away.

A spokeswoman for the project said best practice safety standards meant it was safer for the public not to watch live.

"The team appreciates there is public interest in the event and is planning to accommodate this with media assistance.

"The public is therefore encouraged to not attend on implosion day but instead view it from home."

Vantage points to watch the implosion live would be "extremely limited" because of safety fences, she said. The public would be able to watch it online through live streaming.

The implosion date has been the subject of rumour since the building's demise was announced.

An April 18 date surfaced on social media in March but implosion project leader Ceres New Zealand was quick to clarify nothing had been confirmed.

Deon Swiggs, who runs the Rebuild Christchurch quake recovery news website, said he was contacted by NTP after publicising the April 18 date and asked to remove it. He believed it was to discourage people from attending the implosion.

"[They] said, 'we're trying not to let anybody know'."

Swiggs left the date on the Rebuild Christchurch Facebook page.

"It's part of the story of Christchurch. There's all those little mini-steps in a recovery that help and I think this is one of those. I think if they just owned it and took the right steps I really think they could make something really cool out of this and support Christchurch people in their recovery."

A Facebook page about the implosion has also publicised a date. Page host Daniel Galt said NTP asked him to remove the entire page "because they don't want the public to attend".

The page is still on Facebook. More than 6500 people have indicated on it they are interested in attending the implosion.

New Zealand Demolition and Asbestos president Alan Edge said asking the public to stay away made sense.

"If you have half of Christchurch there you're going to have traffic jams, the whole nine yards, a chance of injury. It's being sensible really. Is it going to change your or my life it we don't see it come down?"

Cordons for the implosion would likely be in place at least 200 metres around the station, he said.

The building contains asbestos, which is being removed.

Ngai Tahu last month announced a $150 million office and apartment complex would be built on the site of the station and the King Edward barracks, with construction scheduled to start in July.

Watch the implosion as it happens on Stuff.

- Stuff