Public input sought on red-zone compensation

The Government will consult the public on a possible revised compensation offer for some Christchurch red-zoners.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee has asked for a recovery plan on the Crown offers to owners of vacant, commercial and uninsured land in the residential red zone.

He expected any revised offer would be made by the middle of the year.

The Supreme Court in March directed the Government to reconsider the compensation package for red-zoned residents not eligible for its initial offer. Vacant, commercial and uninsured land owners were offered a payout of 50 per cent of the rating valuation (RV) of their land. Those with insured land were offered 100 per cent RV.

The court ruled red-zoners' insurance status should not be a determinative factor in formulating a compensation offer. It recommended a recovery plan - allowed for under the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act - be used in reconsidering the deal.

The plan would be prepared by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) and would include public input, Brownlee said.

"The recovery plan process allows us to consider the different options, and for people to give their views based on what it means for the property owners, as well as the taxpayer and how people insure their properties."

If an increased offer was made, red-zoners who had already accepted a lower one would be eligible for a top up. Owners of vacant, commercial and uninsured properties in the Port Hills were yet to receive any Crown compensation offer. One would be made based on the recovery plan and would not be less than the offer to flat land red zoners.

Andrea Newman, owner of a vacant Port Hills red-zoned section, said she was disappointed by the Government's move.

"How much more advice does (the minister) need to get?

"It just seems to me to be dragging it out. Just making it that much harder for everybody to get on."

A group known as the Quake Outcasts, who were ineligible for the original Crown offer, was the appellant in the Supreme Court case.

Outcasts lawyer Grant Cameron said, "(The recovery plan is) a really disappointing development, although one that we thought would occur.

"The Government has shown no consideration whatsoever for the people in the circumstances that they're in. We'll be considering our options closely."

Public comment would be one part of the recovery plan. The document would be drafted by Cera and notified for further public comment before being delivered to Brownlee for consideration.

- Stuff