Three-quarters of Canterbury tourism firms have had a drop in international visitors since February 2011's earthquake.

Otago University tourism department postdoctoral fellow Caroline Orchiston has been researching the effects of Canterbury's quakes on the region's tourism. The work builds on her doctoral thesis in geology and tourism, where she looked at the effects of a magnitude-8.0 Alpine Fault quake on tourism on the West Coast, in the Southern Alps and Canterbury.

She hopes to present her findings to the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority and to Christchurch & Canterbury Tourism in September.

Some issues had already become apparent in her analysis, she said.

In April, she sent out 720 surveys asking how the quake had affected tourism in terms of accommodation, activities and attractions, and transport.

Five hundred questionnaires went to operators in the region's worst-affected zone - everyone who had experienced quake shaking of modified mercalli six (slightly damaging) or above, generally between the Waimakariri River and Timaru. A different survey was sent to the remainder of the group elsewhere in Canterbury - those who had not been affected by physical or infrastructural damage.

It was a long, detailed survey. "It looked at impacts in terms of direct effects on infrastructure, but I also asked them for examples of whether the types of visitors they received had changed.

"Seventy-five per cent said international [tourist numbers] had dropped since February 2011," she said.

"What was quite clear was there were winners and losers after February. You thought, 'Oh God, it's all doom and gloom for tourism', but some people did well out of it."

Overall, 55 per cent reported reduced visitor numbers.

Since the quake, 52 per cent said revenue had fallen, but 37 per cent said it had increased, she said.

"I would suspect motels did fairly well out of it, especially those in the city," she said.

"There were a lot of comments from the accommodation sector saying they had been rushed off their feet."

In her PhD research, she found that while tourist operators were aware of the risk of a large Alpine Fault quake, they did not understand the impact on their business and how long they might be unable to trade.

- The Press

Comments