Quake recovery job appointment a 'fiasco' JOHN HARTEVELT

The appointment of a chief executive to lead the Christchurch earthquake recovery has turned in to "a fiasco," Labour says.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee yesterday said Customs chief Martyn Dunne would not take the role temporarily, as had been reported by Fairfax newspapers during the week.

Brownlee dismissed the report as ''premature speculation''.

However, Labour's Clayton Cosgrove said this afternoon Brownlee had told a senior Radio New Zealand journalist that Dunne would be appointed.

And last week, local MPs had been told by Civil Defence Controller Steve Brazier that Dunne would be appointed, Cosgrove said.

''Where would he have got that information from, other than from the Government?'' Cosgrove said.

Prime Minister John Key this morning said Dunne had been ''in the frame'' for the job.

''But in the end the decision was made not to progress and that's a matter for the State Services Commissioner,'' Key told TVNZ's Breakfast.

A spokesman for State Services Commissioner Iain Rennie said an interim appointment would be announced once the new body was set up.

For an interim appointment, the Commissioner would approach someone who he thought was appropriate to act in the role and invite them to take it up.

The State Services Commission has so far not responded to questions.

Key was also asked on Newstalk ZB whether Dunne had turned down the role because he did not want to work with Brownlee.

''I don't think that's an accurate description, but I don't know all of the details,'' Key said.

Brownlee would not be interviewed yesterday and his spokesman said he had no comment on suggestions Dunne had turned the job down.

Dunne has also declined to be interviewed.

Cosgrove said: ''This has become a fiasco, and Canterbury people are the losers.''

In a newsletter about post-quake work sent out this afternoon, Cosgrove said he had failed so far to convince Brownlee that the Government needed to work with Canterbury people before setting up a new quake recovery authority.

''So far my colleagues and I have had no success in getting through to Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee or to other Ministers, who are turning their backs on proper consultation and seem set on imposing their own solutions on Canterbury people,'' Cosgrove said.

Cabinet is meeting today and Key said the recovery body and its leader would be announced this week.

- Stuff