Quake Outcasts win in Supreme Court

Maarten Holl Bernie Shutt who had been planning to build his "dream retirement home" on his Bexley section. He was offered $46,000 from the Crown and had turned down a $180,000 offer before the earthquakes.

Some Christchurch red-zoners have won a court decision to be properly compensated for their earthquake-damaged properties.

The Supreme Court on Friday ruled that the Government must reconsider its compensation offer to landowners in the residential red zone with vacant, commercial or uninsured properties.

Read more: Red-zoners' four-year battle for justice

Those 160 landowners did not qualify for the original Crown offer to red-zoners - a 2007 rateable valuation (RV) payout for their land and house.

They were instead offered a payment of half the RV of their land. Commercial owners could get 100 per cent of RV for their buildings as well.

The Supreme Court found, in a majority ruling, that the reduced offers "were not lawfully made".

"The [Canterbury earthquake recovery] minister and the chief executive of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) should be directed to reconsider their decisions," it said.

Vacant, uninsured and commercial property owners were subject to the reduced offer because their land was not insured – a qualifying factor for the original Crown offer.

The court found it was the Government's red-zoning policy that had left those landowners potentially out of pocket, not their insurance status.

"The harm to [uninsured or uninsurable land] owners has arisen, at least to a degree, because of Government policy of facilitating voluntary withdrawal, rather than their insurance status."

It also ruled that the Government had not properly considered the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act and its purpose of "social, economic, cultural and environmental wellbeing" when making the reduced offer.

The lack of consultation in formulating the reduced offer and the delay in extending it [it was made 15 months after the initial red-zoning] were relevant factors, the court said, and should have been considered, along with "the current very difficult living conditions in the red zones".

The decision brings an end to two years of court battles.

Two actions against the Government, one by property developer John Fowler, the other by a group of landowners known as the Quake Outcasts, were filed in mid-2013.

The High Court and the Court of Appeal backed their position that their compensation offer be revised.

The Government had argued that the land had been rendered worthless by the quakes and any more compensation would create a moral hazard - the Crown as a benevolent insurer of the uninsured.

Quake Outcasts spokesman Ernest Tsao said the decision gave the group's members closure.

"I'm a bit more settled now that this thing is just gone," he said.

"We have peace of mind now that justice is on our side and the Government is now being directed to do that right thing.

"Exactly what they will do [what sort of revised offer they will make] is up to them, but we do have the option to ask the Supreme Court for direction if we need to."

The Human Rights Commission, which supported the Quake Outcasts and Fowler Developments' legal bid, was "delighted" by the decision.

"Decisions concerning the red zone should have taken into account human rights principles," commissioner David Rutherford said.

"This could have happened if Government had followed the process set out in the act. The failure to do so has - and continues to - negatively impact on the mental and physical health, housing and property rights of the people affected by the decisions.

"The Government has an opportunity to put things right now."

A Cera spokeswoman said the authority was reviewing the decision.

- The Press