Quake rebuild leader had big impact TIM FULTON AND JOSH FAGAN

Businessman Mark Ford, a leader of the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Team (Scirt), was a strategic thinker who made a real difference to the rebuild, a former colleague says.

Ford, who yesterday lost a long battle with illness, had chaired the client governance group and later the horizontal infrastructure governance group.

He oversaw the Crown and Christchurch City Council repair of earthquake-damaged infrastructure such as roads, bridges and underground pipes, in Christchurch.

Scirt clients are the Christchurch City Council, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) and the New Zealand Transport Agency.

The structure has five businesses contracted to do the $2.3 billion repair of water, wastewater, stormwater and roading networks.

Cera's deputy chief executive, implementation, Warwick Isaacs, said Ford made a real difference in Christchurch's recovery.

Part of his legacy would be "the processes he put in place to ensure future generations in Christchurch have a fully functioning infrastructure network they can rely on".

Ford was a "no-nonsense operator", Isaacs said. "He had a great strategic brain and if he couldn't solve a problem himself, he would find a route to the answer."

He was also fiercely loyal and had great compassion for those that worked under him.

"Away from the business world, he was a very proud father and loved his time fixing up his boats or tractors at his bach at the Coromandel."

Ford would be greatly missed within Scirt for his business acumen and his friendship, Isaacs said.

In recent years Ford had also been called on to chair the state-owned Solid Energy, at a time when its financial difficulties were becoming clear.

In March last year he said Solid Energy would be reorganised into a smaller company focused on mining.

The changes followed the exit from Solid of chief executive Don Elder, whose pay had been $1.1m in the 2012 financial year.

Ford said the subsequent CEO would "certainly not" be paid that much.

Pip Dunphy, who succeeded Ford as chairwoman of Solid Energy's board, said he was an extremely personable man who was instrumental in major reforms.

Dunphy had earlier worked alongside Ford on the board of Auckland Transport. She said he was tirelessly committed to "big-scale change" and brought a great degree of wisdom and business skills to every project he tackled.

"He was very clear about what was expected. He could always reach out to people and work out what was needed."

He was also good company and a larger than life presence at board meetings.

"I have to say he's always had a big reputation and a huge personality, a terrific person always having a joke with people."

- The Press