Cantabrians are being urged to embrace earthquake tourism, despite many residents becoming fed up with people "rubbernecking" at their damaged houses.

There is still strong interest among visitors to the city to see the earthquake damage first hand, with more than 20,000 people visiting the Quake City museum since it opened in February and more than 37,000 passengers taking one of the Christchurch CBD Red Zone tours.

However, many residents are frustrated by what they see as "rubberneckers".

A study by the University of Otago has revealed residents accepted quake tourism in the CBD, but felt tourists visiting their damaged houses was a step too far.

"We found that most residents were accommodating with regard to earthquake tours focused on the CBD," researcher Shelagh Ferguson said.

"However, they were far less happy with the possibility of tours coming into residential areas to view destroyed homes in the eastern suburbs."

Revealing personal details of those who lost their lives in the quakes, or taking photographs of the sites of mass fatalities, was also seen as an intrusion, the study found.

Christchurch and Canterbury Tourism chief executive Tim Hunter agreed people should stick to official tours, rather than going to see people's houses by themselves.

"Tour companies are doing a really good, sensitive job of telling the whole story."

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) chief executive Roger Sutton said the organisation had never encouraged or facilitated "tours" of the residential red zone.

"Cera would not support the idea of organised residential tours without the full approval and backing of the people in the local community."

However, Red Zone Tours operator Robin McCarthy, who took tourists through residential areas as well as the CBD, said people needed to fully embrace quake tourism.

"A common comment [from tourists] is that: 'We thought it was only the city centre, because that's all we've seen on the telly'. They are blown away when they see what has happened to the residential areas, and the land form changes."

Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce chief executive Peter Townsend agreed.

"We've had an extraordinary event in Christchurch and there's a lot of interest internationally in our city. We need to be willing to share that in a sensitive and tasteful way."

Red Bus chairman Peter Rae was pleased to hear "most Christchurch residents were accommodating" with regards to earthquake tours focused on the CBD.

"Where the Red Bus tour visited sites involving fatalities, such as the CTV building, every effort was made to ensure the material was sensitive and respectful to those who died."

But the argument over rubbernecking may become redundant, as experts believe the focus of quake tourism is morphing from rubble to the rebuild.

"Tourists don't want to just look at damaged buildings," Hunter said.

Red Bus would soon be launching a new "rebuild" tour, Rae said.

"People are definitely moving on and are interested in the rebuild and what the future face of Christchurch will look like. However, they are still interested in learning about the earthquakes, so there will be an element of this in our new tour."

WHAT READERS THINK

Danni Morgan said her boyfriend lived in a red-zoned area of Brooklands and tourists were constantly driving "really slowly" and "staring at everything".

"It starts to feel a bit invasive when they are looking up your driveway and you're there. I wouldn't dream of going and staring up their driveways, but because of the damage in the area it makes it all right?"

Tim Williams said he lived in a badly damaged area and helicopter tours overhead were frustrating.

"It's rude, and it's disrespectful of people's loss and the sadness of what we have to live through everyday. These tourists can go home to their nice warm safe homes, but we still have to live with it. We are not monkeys in a zoo, we are people. Have some respect and don't do your looky-loo stuff."

Gina Oldman lived in a half-red, half-green street and said she welcomed tourists.

"Whilst we didn't appreciate the tourists directly following the quakes and the helicopters got very annoying, things have changed. We need people to see what we are still dealing with."

BEST SPOTS



There are walking, cycling, bus, Segway and helicopter tours of Christchurch's earthquake spots.

"Points of interest" on Red Bus' tours include:

The CTV site

Knox Church

Cathedral Square

The Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament

Residential Red Zone (Oxford/Cambridge Tce)

Lichfield Lanes, Sol Square

The site of Grand Chancellor Hotel

- The Press

Comments