Christchurch residents worried about potential delays in the rebuild of the central city and anchor projects should take heart that technology can aid quick big-build results.

That is the view of a top United Kingdom civil servant visiting Christchurch this week, who says prefabrication can be used to put together buildings relatively quickly.

Martin Donnelly, Permanent Secretary at the UK Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, said such techniques were used in the design of large projects used in the 2012 summer Olympics hosted in London.

"I think you will be pleasantly surprised by how quickly things do go up [in Christchurch]," Donnelly said.

The United Kingdom has expressed an interest in the Christchurch rebuild for some time. Recently Wellington-based UK Trade & Investment trade development manager Seaver Izatt has started regular visits to Christchurch to help build a UKTI presence in the quake rebuild.

Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce chief executive Peter Townsend said there had been some exasperation from overseas among business groups unable to get enough traction to make a contribution towards the Canterbury rebuild.

He had just returned from a trip to London where he had met with NZTI representatives as well as the New Zealand High Commissioner to the United Kingdom, Lockwood Smith, to discuss the rebuild.

"There's a frustration offshore. There's supposed to be a lot of opportunities in Christchurch but they're quite hard to get your hand on. People are ready to invest in Christchurch... to engage in the rebuild and [asking] how can they do it. And my response in the UK was it's still early days.

"We're all looking for more certainty, we're all looking for a stronger framework in which we can make investment decisions. That's going to happen over time."

Donnelly had met with those involved in the Canterbury reconstruction including Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority chief executive Roger Sutton.

"I was struck by the sense of good teamworking, the real progress made in clearance and horizontal infrastructure and the sense of tremendous opportunity."

- The Press