Rebuild Christchurch donation from Japanese group JO MCKENZIE-MCLEAN

DAVID HALLETT/Fairfax NZ DONATION: Keiko Tanibchi (left) from Japan, who has delivered a donation for the rebuild of Christchurch, pictured in City Mall with Deon Swiggs from The Rebuild Christchurch Foundation and local MP Nicky Wagner.

A Japanese non-profit organisation has donated $17,000 to the Christchurch earthquake recovery.

Keiko Tanibchi of the Nippon Volunteer Network Active in Disaster (NVNAD) met with members of the Rebuild Christchurch Foundation today to tour the damaged city and present the money.

Rebuild Christchurch's Deon Swiggs said they were grateful for the support from the Japanese organisation.



"We are finding almost a year on from February 22nd and more than a year after the September 4th quakes, people are very weary.

"Rebuild Christchurch is totally focussed on long-term support, and donations like this will help us to help others on this long and difficult road back to normality."

NVNAD director Hironobu Teramoto said the organisation selected Rebuild Christchurch because, out of all of the recovery support groups they were aware of, they believed Rebuild Christchurch was working the most effectively for the people of the quake affected city.

"RebuildChristchurch.co.nz was still active in September 2011 when we started to look for a recipient, seven months after the February quake and the communication with Mr Swiggs and his team was always detailed and professional," Teramoto said.

"There was a great deal of information on the Rebuild Christchurch website, involving a lot of people and organisations. The information was always being updated and stayed very relevant which is an important part of moving forward after a disaster."

Rebuild Christchurch was the only organisation NVNAD was supporting in New Zealand however many other countries have received their support, he said.

The organisation would like the money to be used to make "suffering people happier", Teramoto said.

"We would like to help Christchurch people as much as possible and believe Rebuild Christchurch will help this happen. After the March 11 disaster in Japan, we were very grateful to have huge support from all over the world. Please accept our deep sympathies on your loss from the quake on the 22nd of February."

- The Press