Rebuild cost balloons to $30b and is still on rise GEORGINA STYLIANOU

The Canterbury recovery will cost almost $1 billion more than the value of Cyprus' gross domestic product, almost twice Iceland's and more than double New Zealand's annual health spend.

And while Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee says the recovery's price tag is still on the rise, looking set to surpass the latest $30b estimate, Canterbury Employers Chamber of Commerce chief executive Peter Townsend has now gone further, saying the recovery will cost $40b.

In December, the Government revealed the bill for the Canterbury quakes would likely push past $30b, with taxpayers picking up about $13b.

Speaking at an update on the recovery on Friday, Brownlee said the rebuild would "easily become a $30b project".

"Treasury estimates started out at about $15b . . . they were then revised to about $20 to 25b, and now we're looking at that figure again."

Next month the Government would have a "better indication of just how big that number will go", he said.

Brownlee said the majority of the recovery had so far been funded by the Government, including $2b on red zone settlements, a $500 million contract for the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team and $4b worth of settlements from the Earthquake Commission.

One reason for the rising cost could be attributed to the Government taking "options that are not the cheapest", such as the $600m redevelopment of Christchurch and Burwood Hospitals.

"Most projects have considerable escalation factors built in, because cost inflation is a known phenomenon in post-disaster scenarios."

Brownlee said the biggest cost would be EQC, with a total liability exceeding $12b. "Despite EQC having extensive reinsurance, the $6b natural disaster fund, which was built up over two decades, will be wiped out and the Crown may face an additional $1.5b cost."

Townsend said $30b was "an indicative cost" and predicted it would be closer to $40b. He said the initial injection of funds came from the Government but the long-term recovery of the region would be "underpinned by private insurance". "A big part of the recovery is in housing and commercial buildings so that's where [insurance] funds will come from."

He said the cost of the recovery was "just reality".

Finance Minister Bill English said the cost was "slightly more than expected" but "estimates are stabilising rather than taking off".

While there was no "official limit" as to what would be spent on the recovery, he said the Government was looking to "do a good job while . . . making sure we can get value for money".

The role of the private sector would be "very important", but English understood the need for certainty before investors could make "vital decisions".

"Both the Government and the [Christchurch City Council] need to listen very carefully as to what the private sector's expectations are."

WHAT IS $30 BILLION?

About $1 billion more than the value of the gross domestic product (GDP) of Cyprus. Almost double Iceland's GDP. New Zealand's health budget for the 2012-2013 financial year was $14.2 billion. 133 covered stadiums similar to Dunedin's Forsyth Barr Stadium.

- The Press

Comments