Rebuild boom expected to slow after two years MICHAEL WRIGHT

Relevant offers

It seems an odd thought, but Christchurch's rebuild boom is nearly over.

Economic growth in Canterbury - driven almost entirely by the earthquake rebuild - is expected to ease over the next two years, dropping from a rate of 5 per cent to between 1 and 2 per cent by 2017. The Canterbury Development Corporation (CDC) expects it to stay around this level for the next decade.

Don't misunderstand, the economy is not stalling. It will still be growing, just not as fast as it has been.

Opinions vary on why this is, but one thing seems clear - house prices, and therefore rents, are going to go down.

The logic goes like this: if economic growth is easing, it means the rebuild must be getting somewhere, which means a large chunk of the construction work is done.

"As a result of that, the inherent tension in the housing market right now is going to go away," NZIER economist Shamubeel Eaqub said.

"There is absolutely no reason housing should cost nearly as much as it does in Canterbury now. (By) rents and house prices relative to incomes, Canterbury is looking incredibly expensive and it's simply not sustainable."

Don't expect your real estate agent or landlord to start budging any time soon, though. Eaqub is expecting inflated prices until 2017.

Home builder Mike Greer agrees. In fact, he doubts economic growth will dip at all between now and then.

"A First World city of our size needs about 3500 new houses a years just to regenerate and most of them don't have the historic poor housing that we've had. We've only produced, on top of that, about 7000 houses over the past four years. The (residential) rebuild's somewhere between 16,000 and 21,000.

"I think we've got at least three years before we see any sign of a slowdown. The land developers are still not providing land fast enough to build houses."

As the houses get built and the prices eventually start to fall, jobs is the next question. Canterbury has about 48,500 construction workers. Where will they all go?

Depending on who you talk to they will stay put, relocate overseas or retrain and get other jobs in Canterbury. It's too far in the future for anyone to do more than speculate. Opinions also differ on whether there are too many bodies, or not enough.

Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce chief executive Peter Townsend believes a shortage of resources, labour included, is behind the slower economic growth CDC is predicting. Otherwise it would keep climbing.

"I see the economy rattling along at a very brisk pace for a long time yet but it won't continue to grow exponentially because it can't."

South Base Construction chief executive Quin Henderson believes there's "plenty of labour out there".

Any economic slowdown is because further growth would push construction costs higher still, he said. Investors would need to offset that with higher rents, which tenants won't pay.

"Rentals can't keep going up so we reach a point of equilibrium.

"They're sure not going to start paying higher rentals in Christchurch than in Auckland."

Henderson is picking another commercial building boom in about five years. Once the CBD is resurrected and anchor projects are built, investors will be able to find the tenants for inner city office buildings. Whenever the rebuild boom is over, it will be down to the rest of the province to drive the economy. The same as everyone does when there isn't an earthquake to rebuild from.

That, Eaqub said, will be the real test.

"It's been difficult for those areas to recover because the amenities haven't been available, the cost of doing business has been very high through higher wages and higher rents.

"As those things start to dissipate, we should start to see some of the old engines of economic growth in Canterbury firing up again. It's been a long time coming."

- The Press

Comments