Recovery leaders miss forum on Cera's role GEORGINA STYLIANOU

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) was absent from a community forum about its recovery role and how it will transition out of Christchurch.

Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel, Waimakariri District Mayor David Ayers, Selwyn District councillor Malcolm Lyall, Ngai Tahu chief executive Arihia Bennett and Environment Canterbury (ECan) chairwoman Dame Margaret Bazley each addressed key questions about the recovery at an open forum last night.

The event, organised by One Voice Te Reo Kotahi (OVTRK), focused on the working relationship between Cera and the local authorities but representatives from Cera were unable to attend.

The event invitation listed Cera chief executive Roger Sutton and senior manager Michelle Mitchell as confirmed guests.

However, an email from Sutton to forum co-organiser Katherine Peet said senior members of Cera, including himself, were in Wellington for a Cabinet committee with ministers.

In recent months discussion about how Cera will transition out of the city has emerged but Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee has publicly stated it was too early for such a debate.

Dalziel, however, has said the city needed to know exactly how the transition would be managed when Cera's governing legislation expired in April 2016.

"The recovery strategy specifically requires partners to work together in collaboration to develop the transition and that plan has to be written by April 2015.

"That's why I'm talking about it this year . . . it is not something that can afford to wait," Dalziel said last night.

She said the role of Cera would continue after 2016, it was just the legislation that would disappear.

However, Bazley said it was too early to talk about Cera's transition out of the city.

"Having said that, I support returning all the normal functions to [the council] as soon as possible."

Bazley said ECan, the council, Ngai Tahu and the Selwyn and Waimakariri councils would not have been able to facilitate the recovery without the Government and the establishment of Cera.

"I watch Mr Brownlee and, while we have our differences, I think we need him and we need Cera for some time yet."

- The Press

Comments