Red zoning destroys Christchurch couple's house building dream

John Kirk-Anderson Aaron Duncan and Sarah Chisnall with a model of the geodesic dome house they were going to build on their Port Hills section. Instead, they are still waiting for a Government offer on the red-zoned section.

Aaron Duncan and Sarah Chisnall's dream to build a house on Christchurch's Port Hills was destroyed when their land was red zoned in 2012 and they remain in limbo nearly three years on.

When the February 2011 quake hit, the engaged couple had plans drawn up for their future house.

The land was not damaged and was initially white zoned, meaning more investigation on the land was needed.

Duncan hired a structural engineer to check the building plans and had made progress on the construction design when the Government announced in August 2012 the land would be red zoned.

Building a house on the land was no longer permitted because of rockfall risk and as bare land cannot be insured, there is no compensation for the loss.

Since then, the couple has been in limbo - they are waiting to receive a buyout offer from the Crown and are not able to use the equity in the land in the meantime.

Taxpayers will now have a say in any offer for the land they do receive.

On Tuesday, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) launched public consultation on the Crown offers to buy vacant, uninsured and commercial, industrial properties in the residential red zone.

People were invited to provide written comments as part of the development of the plan.

The consultation follows a March Supreme Court decision telling the Government to reconsider its compensation offer to landowners in the residential red zone with vacant, commercial or uninsured properties.

Those 160 landowners did not qualify for the original Crown offer to red-zoners - a 2007 rateable valuation (RV) payout for their land and house. They were instead offered a payment of half the RV of their land.

The Supreme Court found, in a majority ruling, that the reduced offers "were not lawfully made".

Owners of properties in these categories in the Port Hills red zones had not yet received an offer.

Cera said any property owner that accepted the September 2012 offer would be offered a top up if there was a larger revised offer.

Duncan said he would make a submission on the consultation.

"All we want is to be treated fairly. People who started construction on a house before the quakes received a 100 per cent payout. Why should we only get 50 per cent?"

The public feedback will feed into the development of the draft recovery plan, which would also be released for public comment from May 26, Cera said.

Following analysis of this second round of comment, a decision on the Crown offer is expected by the middle of the year.

To submit, visit www.cera.govt.nz/redzoneoffer. Submissions close May 19.

- Stuff