Red zoners four-year battle for justice

John Kirk-Anderson QUAKE OUTCASTS: Karen and Wayne Jeffrey, and Bernie Shutt, right, have had a long legal battle over their red-zone payouts.

It has taken nearly two years, but the Quake Outcasts have been welcomed into the fold.

The group's plight, which ended on Friday with the Supreme Court ruling the Government must reconsider the compensation offer extended to them, in fact started nearly four years ago, but their case was a slow burner.

As details emerged in mid-2011 of how the Government would compensate those with homes on land irreparably damaged in the earthquakes, the unlucky few began to be identified.

Dean Kozanic LEGAL BATTLE: The Quake Outcasts battle began in the Christchurch High Court.

Some properties in the residential red zone did not qualify for the Crown compensation offer: a 2007 rateable valuation (RV) payout for their land and house. These were vacant sections, commercial properties and uninsured properties.

The rub was that the Crown offer was triggered through a property's Earthquake Commission (EQC) coverage. Home owners acquire that by paying EQC levies, which are part of the premiums on a house insurance policy. No house policy, no coverage. Vacant land cannot be insured, with a house policy or otherwise; EQC covers residential property only, which discounts the commercial sites; and uninsured properties are, well, uninsured.

Fifteen months after extending the bulk of red zoners the compensatory RV payment, the Government made its best offer for those who missed out: a cheque for half the RV of their land.

Commercial buildings were the only exception. They could get 100 per cent of RV for their buildings as well. Anything more would be a "moral hazard", creating the precedent of a Government safety net for the uninsured.

The red zoners in question did not take this news well. Many believed they had been short changed by an arbitrary ruling (Why 50 per cent? Why not 70, or 30?) simply by being unlucky enough to be in this minority. Talk of legal action started immediately.

Four months later, in January 2013, it emerged Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee had received advice from his department, the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera), that bare land, commercial and uninsured red zoners should be offered the same deal as their fully insured counterparts. Documents showed a Cera official noting the Government would "eventually be called to task" on the point. Brownlee denied the Cera advice was a recommendation, instead labelling it "initial thinking".

Official proceedings started in May. A group of disaffected red zoners known as the Quake Outcasts, representing about a third of the affected properties, filed papers at the High Court in Christchurch seeking a judicial review of the Government offer. They joined John Fowler, a property developer with 11 vacant sections in a red-zoned Brooklands subdivision, who had already filed a similar action. The combined hearing was set down for July.

Arguments that had been swirling for months began to take shape. Central to the Quake Outcasts' case was the question of land value. The Government had long maintained it was the earthquakes that took all the value out of the land, leaning heavily on a comment by valuer-general Neill Sullivan that its worth was about 10 per cent what it was pre-quake. (Sullivan later qualified his comment, saying zoning information was "critical" in determining value).

It also had the moral hazard argument. The Outcasts claimed it was the red zoning that had decimated land values. The most badly affected green zone land had held its value after the quakes and the two areas bordered each other across Christchurch - how could one be so badly hit and the other not at all?

The Outcasts won. Resoundingly. Justice Panckhurst ruled not only that the 50 per cent offer should be revised, but that the entire red zoning process was unlawful.

The moral hazard issue was legitimate, the judge said, but had been used as a "blunt instrument" because it drew no distinction between those who chose to be uninsured and the uninsurable.

Brownlee quickly announced plans to appeal. In December 2013, the Court of Appeal backed the initial ruling that the 50 per cent offer be revised, but overturned the finding that the red zoning process was unlawful.

So to the Supreme Court, the final arbiter. Despite winning two from two, it was the Outcasts who sought the ultimate hearing. The Government was dragging the chain on any revised offer, they said, and it needed to seek a final ruling while it could to pre-empt any dissatisfaction with it, when it came.

New Zealand's highest court has ordered the Government to reconsider the offer. Whatever it is, the outcasts have won.

Timeline:

June 2011: The Govt announces quake-damaged land deemed uneconomic to repair would be zoned red and subject to an offer of Crown compensation

November 2011: The Press reports the case of John Fowler, who owned 11 vacant sections in Brooklands subdivision that had been red-zoned. His company was the first to take legal action against the Govt.

September 2012: The Govt makes reduced compensation offers to owners of vacant, commercial and uninsured properties in the residential red zone.

July 2013: The cases of the Quakes Outcasts and Fowler Developments are heard in the High Court in Christchurch. Justice Panckhurst rules against the Govt.

December 2013: The Court of Appeal upholds Panckhurst's finding that the reduced offer be revised but overturns his ruling the zoning process was unlawful.

July 2014: Outcasts/Fowler cases heard at the Supreme Court in Wellington.

March 2015: Supreme Court upholds High Court and Court of Appeal findings that decisions around compensation for the Quake Outcasts, et al, "were not lawfully made". It orders the Govt to reconsider.

- The Press