Relationships Aotearoa closing would be just the start, warns sector

BEN CURRAN/ FAIRFAX NZ Minister of Social Development Anne Tolley

The funding crisis, which may force the closure of Relationships Aotearoa could just be the start of a "challenging time" for Canterbury social services.

Relationships Aotearoa said at the weekend it faced closure while it negotiated with the Government over funding. Some 180 staff nationwide and 7000 clients will be affected.

The organisation, which managed counselling for about 30,000 Cantabrians after the 2011 earthquakes, was in talks last week after it said Government contracts failed to keep them out of the red.

John Kirk-Anderson Relationships Aotearoa director southern operations Pablo Godoy.

The organisation has faced deficits in recent years, including a loss of $270,000 in the last financial year.

It received close to $8 million a year from the Ministry of Social Development, Ministry of Justice and Corrections Department.

Relationships Aotearoa communications manager Sarah Turnbull said on Sunday that the decision was made to close on Saturday.

On Monday, she said the comment was "pre-emptive".

"It is messy. We've been working long hours and it is very emotional," she said.

"I've probably been a little preemptive in informing [you]. I wasn't aware that there were other things happening over the weekend around it and I apologise."

The organisation posted on Facebook that it had not yet closed.

"We continue to work with the ministries about services and transition of clients," it said.

One person responded that the communication over the possible closure was "confusing".

Social Development Minister Anne Tolley and her ministry were not aware of the organisation's decision to close when contacted on Sunday.

Tolley said she was aware the organisation, MSD and other agencies were still in negotiations as of Friday, and that one of the issues being discussed was a transition plan.

"I'm advised that no final decision has yet been made on this. Ministers do not play a part in negotiations. As part of its contingency plan MSD is confident other providers can deliver services to clients."

A Ministry of Social Development spokesman said the ministry was continuing to work with Relationships Aotearoa to ensure the best possible outcomes for clients, "should they decide to close".

He said the ministries of Social Development, Justice, and Corrections would work with Relationships Aotearoa on a transition plan for clients to ensure they had access to the counselling services they needed.

Turnbull said all offices across the country would still be open on Monday to existing clients, with a gradual transition to other providers. Relationships Aotearoa warned on Monday that it could close if talks with the Government to secure continued funding failed.

For Canterbury, the service has special significance not only as an occupant in the ill-fated CTV building that collapsed after the February 22 earthquake, but also as the provider of counselling services after.

Council of Social Services Christchurch executive officer Sharon Torstonson said it was bad timing for Christchurch's psychosocial recovery for the earthquakes.

"We know they won't be the only service affected," she said.

Social Service Providers Aotearoa national manager Tara D'Sousa said the sector had been put "on notice" recently by the Government that funding models were going to change at the expense of some services and jobs losses were imminent.

She said the Government had indicated its priorities would be directed toward vulnerable children and young people.

"It is a hard time for the sector, a challenging time," she said.

"Lot's of clients will be affected and the remedial actions for them is what is of most importance," she said.

Torstonson said it was bad timing for Christchurch because years four and five after a natural disaster were the worst in terms of social needs.

She said the crisis surrounding Relationships Aotearoa should not detract from what the Christchurch office had done for earthquake recovery.

"Ever since they walked out of the CTV building they have been one of the leading providers in Christchurch."

* An earlier version of this story that said Relationships Aotearoa had already decided to close was based on information provided by the organisation on Sunday. While it is expected to shut, no decision has yet been made.

- Stuff