Roger Sutton finds heritage protected in quake-hit Italian city of L'Aquila

Reuters US President Barack Obama, second from left, tours the L'Aquila area in central Italy four months after the earthquake which killed more than 300 people in 2009.

OPINION:

Roger Sutton visited the earthquake-damaged Italian city of L'Aquila and found marked differences between its post-quake experience and that of Christchurch.



My Italian is pretty terrible, but I loved talking to Italians about Christchurch. I'd been asked to speak at a week-long programme of lectures and workshops in Rome and Naples, with experts from around the world sharing their experiences following disasters and discussing what we could learn from each other.



The conference was based in Rome and organised by University of Rome and University of Canterbury. The conference included a visit a city called L'Aquila, an hour to the east of Rome, surrounded by mountains and hit by a magnitude 6.3 earthquake in April 2009.



The L'Aquila region has roughly the same population as Christchurch and as we approached the historic city I wasn't sure what to expect. Ruins of beautiful buildings? Rubble? Empty spaces where wonderful Italian palazzo used to stand tall? The first thing that struck me, were the cranes on the skyline. It was all too familiar.



L'Aquila is a very special Italian city. It has some buildings dating back to 1254. Its town centre is medieval with elegant squares and grand palazzo or palaces. It sits on "good ground" with no liquefaction or lateral spread issues.



The quake happened at 3.32am, killing 309 people and causing widespread damage. People died in modern apartment buildings and in historic buildings. Hundreds of old buildings were damaged, but many modern buildings were also hit. Poor construction methods were blamed. Criminal charges were brought against those responsible for their construction.



Help for L'Aquila poured in from all over Italy. Within 48 hours, 2500 firemen were on the ground involved in operations. New Zealand by comparison has a total of only 1700 full time firefighters.

A total of 60,000 people were initially made homeless. They were either moved into tent cities or nearby hotels. Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi was famously quoted as saying "enjoy your camping holiday".

In Italy there was absolutely no question of demolition. Some of these buildings had survived or been repaired from previous quakes, going back hundreds and hundreds of years. Italians don't pull historic buildings down.

Joseph Johnson Roger Sutton says Italian engineers see building code improvements as a burden and expensive to implement.

After a massive building inspection programme, with engineers from around Italy working for free, firemen stayed in L'Aquila for over a year to help secure and make safe the historic buildings that had been badly damaged.

SAVING HISTORIC BUILDINGS IS EMBEDDED DEEP IN ITALIAN CULTURE



They built massive timber structures and scaffolds to hold up what were otherwise terminally damaged buildings. Most of these buildings are still waiting for permanent repairs. As my hosts pointed out, L'Aquila was hit by major quakes in 1349, 1452, 1703, and especially damaging one in 1786 killed over 6000 people. After some quakes it took up to 50 years to carry out repairs. Italians don't mind waiting.



The fire service in Italy produces a massive 200-page handbook on how to prop and protect damaged historic buildings. Saving their historic buildings is embedded deep in the Italian culture especially in cities like L'Aquila where the old buildings are the major tourist attraction.



Unlike Christchurch, most people in L'Aquila live in apartment buildings. Many are still unable to return. Some may not return for 10, 20 or even 30 years. To house these people and their families, the government has built 4500 apartments. In classic Italian style, they live rent-free and until recently, they also got free power and gas.



There is no earthquake insurance in Italy. All the repairs are paid for by the government. Why would you buy insurance when the government will step in?

I was fascinated by the long time frames Italians seem happy with, although if you were living rent-free somewhere, why would you mind waiting? The Italians are fascinated and intrigued by the way in Christchurch, local and central government have worked with large contracting firms to form SCIRT to quickly and efficiently fix the underground infrastructure and the roads.

DON SCOTT/FAIRFAX NZ Gap Filler has helped bring life back to the city centre with projects such as the dance-o-mat.

The trust and relationships that allowed this to happen could never occur in Italy.

HIGHER BUILDING CODES RESISTED

The Italians couldn't believe a quake that cost 20 per cent of our country's GDP hasn't wiped us out economically. The answer of course is largely our comprehensive insurance.

They were full of admiration for the range of wellbeing programs (such as the All Right Campaign) programmes where the Government has worked with the community to encourage people to do things to look after our individual and collective mental health.

Interestingly there is a big difference between how the engineers of the two countries have responded to the need for new higher building codes and standards post-quake.

While New Zealand engineers have driven and welcomed these new improved standards, the Italians have resisted, seeing them as a burden and expensive to implement.

In Christchurch we just got on with it. The initial wage and salary subsidy for central city businesses to allow central city firms the breathing space and thinking time was very successful.

The popping up of the Restart Mall to encourage people back into the central city was widely admired by the Italians and they were amazed by true community initiatives like Gap Filler.

One of the biggest differences has been leaders working constructively together. In Christchurch it's been far from perfect, but the conflicts have been minor compared with the fighting I have been told about in Italy. It has slowed their recovery down hugely and made life for many much harder.

I know many in Christchurch want the recovery to go faster, but I left L'Aquila wondering if speed is the answer. I felt very proud of our community and the amazing innovative things that have come out of the earthquake.

Perhaps the last word should be left to the Lonely Planet travel guide that now rates Christchurch as a "must see". It describes L'Aquila as a city where "progress is frustratingly slow with little to draw in casual visitors".

I'm glad to be home.

Roger Sutton was formerly the chief executive of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority.

- The Press