Roger Sutton looks back on three Cera years GEORGINA STYLIANOU

DEAN KOZANIC/Fairfax NZ THREE YEARS: Roger Sutton, pictured here with John Key, reflects on three years at Cera.

Relevant offers

Roger Sutton does not see himself as Canterbury's earthquake boss after 2016.

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) chief executive today marks his third anniversary in the job but told The Press he was unlikely to continue once the organisation's special powers expired in two years.

Central government would continue to have "some sort of presence in Christchurch" after the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act expired in April 2016, Sutton said.

Asked if he saw himself continuing as the head of that "presence", Sutton said: "No, no I don't at this stage".

"I see myself being more of a father, more of a husband, being more of a son to my parents . . . and probably having less intensity in one's work. I'm looking forward to that."

Sutton said he still felt proud to be leading "an outstanding organisation".

His first day in 2011 was a memorable one. Two powerful earthquakes rocked the city, leaving thousands of homes without power and many experiencing the same level of liquefaction generated in the February 2011 earthquake.

Emergency services spent hours scrambling to help the injured and attending callouts for building and major infrastructure damage.

A further 100 inner-city buildings were added to the demolition list.

"It was a crazy day and I'll always remember it," the former Orion chief executive said.

As for how the city's recovery was tracking, Sutton believed "we're roughly where we should be".

People were quick to forget that the ground did not stop shaking for more than a year after the February 2011 earthquake, he said.

"It's very hard to persuade people to go and build something or invest if 10 minutes into the meeting you're hiding under the table asking when the shaking is going to stop."

The December 23 aftershocks - when a magnitude 5.8 quake hit followed by a 5.3 and then a 6.0 - were his lowest moments.

"People had been through enough and everyone was gearing up for Christmas . . . and I remember thinking, ‘No, this is going to be really difficult'.

"I thought people would say that they have just had enough and I was really worried about the effect on the psyche of the city and on investors and builders."

Positive announcements, such as yesterday's confirmation that the Music Centre of Christchurch will build in the performing arts precinct, made it "pretty easy to get excited about the future".

"I think aiming for perfection is always the right thing to do but you're never going to get perfection in such a big programme."

- The Press

Comments