Royal Commission for earthquake repairs unnecessary, Brownlee says

CHRIS BARCLAY/FAIRFAX NZ Sign of frustration: A property on Barbadoes St expresses the angst felt by some Christchurch residents as the earthquake recovery process continues.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee has dismissed the need for royal commission to investigate substandard earthquake repair work in Canterbury.

Christchurch residents angered by the quality and timeframe of repairs carried out through the Earthquake Commission (EQC) and private insurers launched a petition on Thursday urging the Government to establish an inquiry focused on defective home improvements.

The plea for an inquiry comes after the Government investigated 101 quake repairs, most of them EQC, and found a third were not compliant with the building code. A further 23 had "minor defects".

Organisers hope to attract 10,000 signatures before the petition is tabled in Parliament and then, in their view, referred to a select committee that makes a favourable recommendation.

"All of those things depend on Parliament and how it wants to respond to the petition," said Christchurch insurance lawyer Duncan Webb, who is collating the responses.

"Hopefully, the Government will decide it's a good idea and make a change."

Webb was optimistic but Brownlee described a royal commission as "completely unnecessary".

"Warranties apply to earthquake repair work, as they do to all building work in New Zealand, as set out by the terms of the Building Act," he said.

Brownlee added there were already "numerous robust avenues for review and appeal of the standard and scope of earthquake building repairs".

He also claimed regular customer audits carried out by EQC and other insurers showed generally high levels of satisfaction.

READ MORE:

* EQC 'late, inadequate and frequently defective

*EQC faces court challenge over repair policies

*EQC hiring engineers for court cases

*Survey of Canterbury quake repairs caned by critics and advocates

Christchurch City councillor Ali Jones said an inquiry was essential to ensure those affected by natural disasters in the future did not face the same frustrations as those experienced by Cantabrians.

"We need to make sure that if a disaster of this magnitude happen elsewhere in the country that people don't have to go through this again," she said.

"It's not only about the magnitude of the events in Christchurch, there are clearly systemic flaws in the system and the processes and they have to be sorted.

Webb said the scope of the inquiry would include the council's consenting process. Scrutiny Jones welcomed.

"I'm very supportive of our consenting team, hugely supportive of [council building control and city rebuild director] Peter Sparrow.

"I know he, the team and all of my colleagues would applaud anything that's going to avoid the type of nightmare that people have been through. It would be very remiss of the Government not to support a royal commission."

The council's housing spokesman, councillor Glenn Livingstone added: "We need an insurance template and home repair systems worked out in advance of natural disasters."

Labour's acting EQC spokeswoman Megan Woods also backed calls for an inquiry.

"Stories of dodgy repairs, shonky scoping and rorting the system point to much wider problems at EQC," she said.

"There might be hundreds or even thousands of homes with dodgy repairs the homeowner doesn't know about.

"The Government cannot continue to sit on its hands and sit by while people are struggling with this issue. We can't go through something like this and not learn from it."

- Stuff