Rugby union OK with possible Lancaster return

Don Scott An aerial view of Lancaster Park showing the liquefaction that occurred after the February 2011 earthquake.

The Crusaders and Canterbury teams would happily return to the old AMI Stadium if repaired, the region's rugby boss says.

The idea of fixing the old AMI Stadium has been resurrected following comments from Tim Sole, chief executive of council insurer Civic Assurance, that three assessments had concluded the quake-damaged ground - sum insured for $143 million - could be fixed for $50m.

The Government and the Christchurch City Council are committed to building a new stadium closer to the city centre under their Cost Sharing Agreement, with insurance proceeds paying some of the council's $253m share.

"The reinsurers are most unlikely to agree to pay [the council] almost three times that amount just so the council can demolish the current stadium and build another elsewhere," Sole said.

READ MORE:

* Bird's eye view of Lancaster Park

* Stadium's future in doubt

* Goalposts keep shifting on stadium build

* Fresh perspective on stadium

Hamish Riach, the Crusaders and Canterbury Rugby Football Union chief executive, said Canterbury rugby would welcome a refurbished Lancaster Park if plans for a new stadium plan were mothballed.

"We were happily there before the earthquake. If it's viable, then we would clearly go back."

The uncertainty the prospect created was unhelpful, he said. Canterbury rugby had been based at the temporary, 15,000-seat AMI Stadium in Addington since 2012 and was expecting its next move would be to a new stadium.

"Clearly, there are some who wish to revisit that and change it. That creates uncertainty. It's not ideal."

The old stadium's repairability calls into question the council's obligations in building a new one.

The council maintains the old stadium is beyond repair. It will head to mediation with Civic in September to negotiate a global settlement for its $912m of claims with the public insurer.

Mayor Lianne Dalziel last week labelled Sole's comments "really unhelpful". She declined to comment further this week. Sole did also.

Former Mayor Sir Bob Parker, who signed the Cost Sharing Agreement with the Government before leaving office in October 2013, said the document allowed for changes if circumstances warranted.

"The view espoused by some that 'binding' in the context of this document means no change is possible to the cost share agreement is not legally accurate or true," he said.

Clause 6 states "unforeseen circumstances" could provide scope to "vary, revoke or replace" the agreement.

It also stipulates that the council will meet all its financial commitments in the blueprint "even if its assumed insurance payouts are less than budgeted for".

The agreement said any dispute would be dealt with at the executive level of council and the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority. If no agreement could be reached, the Earthquake Recovery Minister and the mayor would jointly make the call on interpretation.

Prime Minister John Key said he spoke with Dalziel about planning issues on Sunday.

"Of course there are hopes and expectations that all this infrastructure can be built but I don't think we're going to say well on a piece of paper you said you'd do this, and be belligerent about it - we'll work with them."

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said: "The Government will hold any future discussions with [the council] in appropriate and constructive circumstances, not through the pages of The Press."

- Stuff