Rumblings of rebellion in Christchurch JOHN MCCRONE

Complex problems: Prime Minister John Key and Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee during a visit to Christchurch.

Is the Christchurch rebuild stalling or are critics of the process creating an unhelpful sense of unrest. JOHN McCRONE takes the temperature of a city attempting to find its feet.

If you want to point a finger, Earthquake Recovery Minister and honorable member for Ilam Gerry Brownlee is a hard guy to miss.

Arrogant, abrasive, humiliating. It does not take much to get some people warmed up on the subject.

And it matters, they say. Brownlee's is the desk across which every significant decision has to pass. So whether the recovery of Christchurch is going well or badly, it is down to him.

The rumblings of rebellion have become almost constant. The Human Rights Commissioner David Rutherford was in Christchurch a few weeks ago and asked to deliver a message to Wellington, apparently.

Under Brownlee, the recovery is stalling. Roger Sutton, as chief executive of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera), is being stifled by his minister. The process is turning bureaucratic, fixated on policies and precedents, losing touch with the people of Christchurch.

Perhaps Brownlee ought to be bypassed and Sutton report direct to Prime Minister John Key? Or a board of directors representing Christchurch's interests inserted between the two to take Brownlee out of the equation a different way?

Then a week ago, it emerged that three well-known Christchurch business leaders had written privately to Brownlee about the need for a change.

Christchurch "rich list" investor Humphry Rolleston, Bruce Irvine, chairman of council- owned Christchurch City Holdings Limited, and Tony Sewell, chief executive of Ngai Tahu Property, said they were concerned about the Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU), the part of Brownlee's empire responsible for the central city Blueprint rebuild.

Again, they called for the buffer of a board - made up of people like themselves. As it happens, Rolleston had been named to just such an advisory panel by Mayor Bob Parker before Brownlee swept in to form the CCDU and take responsibility for the central city rebuild off the council.

The trio also argued that the CCDU should be run by an independent chief executive, a property professional with international development experience, and so by implication, not an accountant and former Timaru town clerk like the CCDU's Warwick Isaacs.

The views of a group like Rolleston, Irvine and Sewell would seem hard for those in Wellington to dismiss. Certainly in National Party circles.

And there has been criticism coming from other Christchurch establishment figures like former National Party minister and Meadow Mushrooms magnate Philip Burdon.

Immediately after the earthquakes, Burdon helped found the Future Canterbury Network (FCN), an attempt to form a club of the great and the good that could help guide the recovery.

FCN began by giving scorecard ratings of the performance of Cera, the Earthquake Commission (EQC) and other authorities involved in the recovery - a move which Brownlee took exception to.

The FCN went nowhere. Like many other such lobbies, it was quickly squeezed out of the picture as Brownlee assumed strong control of all governance under the extraordinary powers granted him by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery (CER) Act.

But Burdon, who is now supporting Labour MP Lianne Dalziel in her bid to become mayor of Christchurch, is not shy of criticising Brownlee, saying after nearly three years of supposed recovery, he feels the city is on the cusp, confidence in the rebuild dangerously fragile.

Burdon says it is right the Government should have established the frameworks and plans. A dominating ministerial presence was probably unavoidable early on, he says. But now the plans have been laid and the issue has become one of implementation, the power to act should be handed back to the city as much as is practicable.

Again, let's have a board, says Burdon, a change in the governance model so that the recovery is run by Cera as an outcome-oriented state-owned enterprise (SOE) rather than a procedure-obsessed government department.

"An SOE model would create a clear divide between policy and operations. It would remove the issue of personalities," says Burdon.

So Brownlee's critics are becoming more open. They are chipping away and possibly change is even happening, they say.

The CCDU had a reorganisation a week ago. Then Diane Turner, Cera's deputy chief executive in charge of strategy and policy, was suddenly off on secondment to Ngai Tahu for unexplained reasons.

That one got the rumour mill into high gear as Turner had been seen as an enforcer of the Government line. So the knives are out, or are they?

Brownlee is a polarising figure and disaster recoveries are polarising events. There are winners and losers financially. Power also shifts and that can leave bruised egos when the formerly prominent suddenly find themselves standing outside the tent.

In Brownlee's own words, the situation is ripe for creating "carpers and moaners" with the time to "buggerise on Facebook all day" while he gets on with the job.

But what is the broad mood of the city so far as it can be discerned?

Casting around for opinions, there seems to be more a feeling of nervousness and frustration than blame or revolt.

The earthquake recovery has reached a stage where, with the residential rebuild, the uncertainties revolve around the Government's intentions.

The red zone has been largely cleared, the homeowners paid out and resettled. The question now appears to be about the quality of the remaining green-zone recovery, particularly where the land is swampy TC3 ground or lies in newly flood-prone suburbs.

Is the Government going to skimp the process, rush through half solutions, or is there the political will to ensure there are fixes that last?

Then for the central city rebuild, the worries revolve around the execution. The CCDU has drafted a blueprint that is amply ambitious, but is it able to see it through, especially when the plan relies on private property owners to make much of the re- investment?

Former Wigram MP, the Progressive Party's Jim Anderton, seems surprisingly understanding of Brownlee and Cera. He says often they are caught in the middle of things.

The biggest complaint he is hearing is about the complexity of the recovery process. There are so many parties involved, so many crossing lines of responsibility, that an individual - whether a homeowner or commercial property investor - does not know where to go to get answers.

"You can get a very confused picture of what's going on or holding things up. It's just a very difficult situation."

And then while some agencies like Environment Canterbury and the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt) are doing their jobs well, other key players, like the council and EQC, have been dismal, Anderton says.

If Brownlee has a problem, it is that the Government has created unrealistic expectations about how easy the recovery was going to be.

"There's been too much of a rush to make things sound as though they will be OK. You can go right back to the statements made by the prime minister where he said no-one in Christchurch would be worse off. But we know we are all worse off in some shape or form."

It has been a classic case of over-promising and under- performing because, for political reasons, the Government has wanted to manage the truth, says Anderton.

"People have been told so often things are going to happen by some stage and then it doesn't, so they don't believe it any more. There's a lack of trust now in the system."

As the comments of Rolleston and others show, the central city has become a particular concern. But those perhaps closer to the investment decisions - like resource lawyer Lauren Semple of Greenwood Roche Chisnall, landowner Philip Carter, and Christchurch Hospitality Incorporated chairman Brian Vieceli - see the situation as difficult rather than a crisis.

Echoing Anderton, Semple says simple confusion is much of the problem.

"The co-ordination of the roles and responsibilities of all the different agencies has been the single most difficult factor in the rebuild. There is the frustration of understanding who is supposed to be doing what and when."

The central city rebuild slowed this year because the Government and council had to reach a cost- sharing arrangement on the anchor projects - the convention centre, justice precinct, metro sports centre and other public buildings.

That took until June, and just as it was agreed, the council stumbled straight into the mess over its consent accreditation, creating another reason for central city investors to hold off.

"What the private sector needs to invest is a sense of security, of things being settled. And in an uncertain environment, every little thing that upsets the equilibrium is going to factor into people's investment decisions. They'll say, Ooh, I might just wait until I can understand that a bit more."

Philip Carter, one of the largest pre-quake property owners with several hotels and prime blocks of land like The Crossing opposite Ballantynes, agrees the issue is just one of "getting all the ducks in a row".

Timelines are critically needed from the CCDU but there is general investor support for the blueprint, he says.

Vieceli, representing the hospitality industry, says likewise Brownlee's style or Cera's bureaucracy do not seem the problem. Rather, it is the lack of clarity that would allow people to make positive decisions about how to get back into the central city.

"No-one wants to be the first and find themselves an island in the middle of a construction zone."

So over-promising and nervousness, but not a crisis.

- The Press

Comments