Scientists see no reason not to rebuild Christchurch PAUL GORMAN

Christchurch will soon be a much safer place to live in, the country's top scientists say.

The Royal Society of New Zealand and the Prime Minister's chief science adviser Sir Peter Gluckman say "thorough science, good engineering, strong and well-enforced regulation, and comprehensive preparation and disaster planning" will keep Christchurch residents safe from future earthquakes.

"Scientifically, there is no reason not to rebuild in Christchurch, though soil degradation means some sites may not be stable or economic to build on," Gluckman told a media briefing yesterday.

Other cities had recovered and rebuilt after devastating quakes that had caused a high number of fatalities and similar levels of damage, including San Francisco, Tokyo, Kobe, Santiago, Mexico City and Napier.

Gluckman said that New Zealand had enough scientific and engineering knowledge to rebuild Christchurch safely.

While houses in parts of the city had been hard hit by the February 22 quake, they had generally performed adequately in terms of safety.

"Houses are munted and you have the personal problems that causes, but people didn't die in houses, they died in older buildings downtown and rock falls.

"What everyone agrees is we have enough knowledge now that a rebuild can start."

A paper on the science of the Canterbury quakes compiled by the Royal Society, Gluckman's science advisory committee and scientists from the multi-Crown research Institute and university Natural Hazards Research Platform said the aftershock pattern had been "fairly typical".

A magnitude five or higher aftershock was still likely at some stage over the next few months. By this time next year, residents might feel only one quake a month.

"What damage such an aftershock might cause depends critically on the location and depth ... just as it did for the February event. There are some indications that the aftershock locations are moving eastwards away from Christchurch," the paper said.

Eastern Christchurch residents should not worry about any potential tsunami from quakes on the offshore end of the Port Hills fault, which generated last month's magnitude 6.3 quake. If the September 4 magnitude 7.1 quake had occurred offshore it would most likely have been a hazard only to beach areas and the estuaries.

"A major tsunami is very unlikely. A number of aftershocks have occurred to the east of Christchurch and further aftershock activity of a generally declining nature in that region is expected. "We know that to generate a significant tsunami generally requires earthquakes larger than magnitude 7.5 and a substantial vertical displacement of the sea floor," the scientists said.

- The Press