Serious Fraud Office clears Christchurch rebuild firm

MICHAEL BRADLEY/FAIRFAX NZ SFO chief executive Julie Read said no evidence of serious or complex fraud was found in an investigation of rebuild company Maincom NZ.

A major probe into post-earthquake fraud in Christchurch has ended with a rebuild contractor being cleared of wrongdoing.

Serious Fraud Office (SFO) staff searched the Woolston headquarters of Maincom NZ in February last year as they scrutinised multiple transactions relating to projects carried out by the company.

On Monday, SFO chief executive Julie Read said the investigation, which spanned more than a year, had been completed. No evidence of serious or complex fraud was found, she said.

Maincom director Warren Bale said he was pleased he and the company had been cleared of wrongdoing.

"I said from the outset that we had every confidence the SFO investigation would find no fault with either Maincom or my own affairs."

Bale described the investigation as "an interesting process".

"If there has been any upside it has been the test of our corporate governance, with confirmation that our values, systems and procedures were robust and transparent."

He thanked clients, suppliers and the company's banker for their support.

"This was pivotal to us maintaining operations with the minimum of disruption.

"Maincom looks forward to continuing its significant home repair role in the Canterbury rebuild."

Bale previously said the actions of a disgruntled former employee may have played a part in Maincom coming under scrutiny.

The Earthquake Commission (EQC) began a review of Maincom in June 2013 in response to allegations. On Monday, a spokesman confirmed the review was ongoing.

Officials have acknowledged conditions are ripe for major financial crime as billions of dollars are poured into the rebuild.

Types of possible fraud included price collusion, construction kickbacks and bribes and false insurance claims.

The SFO has launched six rebuild-related investigations, five of which have been closed without further action.

Earlier this year, Read said she was surprised at the lack of corruption in Christchurch post-quake, but the small nature of many jobs, particularly housing construction, had not lent themselves to large-scale fraud.

A string of major government projects coming on stream could pose a risk, she said.

Maincom NZ is a subsidiary of Australian-based company Maincom Group. It was established in Rotorua in 2007 before its head office moved to Woolston, Christchurch, shortly after the September 2010 earthquake.

It is a small to medium-sized company, which carries out repairs for EQC under the Canterbury Home Repair Programme.

Do you have any information about the ongoing SFO investigation or any other rebuild-related fraud? Contact blair.ensor@press.co.nz or (03) 943 2543.

- Stuff