'Shoddy' EQC repairs leave Christchurch homeowner with wonky floor

Dean Kozanic Sam Thompson's Woolston house looks fine but 'shoddy' EQC repair work is hidden within the foundations.

Sam Thompson had some reservations when he signed off repairs to his earthquake-damaged house.

EQC repairs left this house's floor wonky.

Earthquake Commission (EQC) work was completed, his accommodation allowance had run out and he felt he had no choice.

An examination of the foundations showed notched up pile bearers, he said. Floor boards had been replaced with melamine and chipboard. Pieces of GIB, bricks and untreated wood were used for packing. Even a chair leg had been nailed in to support floorboards, he said.

"The chair leg isn't from my house.

"I foolishly did sign off in the end. They told me I must sign off to return to the property and the sub-contractors wouldn't get paid. My temporary accommodation allowance had run out. I was over a barrel."

Thompson said he complained to Fletcher EQR - the company EQC contracted to do Canterbury home repairs - within the three-month defect liability period.

He has taken legal action against his insurer and EQC.

A Fletcher EQR spokesman said he could not comment on Thompson's case as it was before the courts.

He said Fletcher had received and resolved 6525 repair complaints from homeowners from 146,000 compelted jobs.

It had 123 active complaints.

"We expect high standards from our staff. If people feel their work has been signed off despite poor workmanship or that staff are behaving inappropriately we follow this up," the spokesman said.

"Inevitably, in a repair programme of such scale and complexity, there will be some disputes or problems.

"Complaints are investigated and attempts are made to resolve each one."

Thompson, 30, bought the Clarendon Tce, Woolston, house a month before the September 2010 earthquake.

His mother, who suffers from MS, lived there.

The building was "not the house I bought five years ago", Thompson said.

"Everything they've touched has turned to sh**."

EQC figures show 65,005 home repairs have been completed under the Canterbury Home Repair Programme.

Once repairs are completed, homeowners are invited to an inspection meeting.

Staff were expected to sign off works with the contractor and customer in agreement, a Fletcher EQR spokesman said.

EQC's homeowners guide states: "While it is preferred that the homeowner signs the form, it is not required."

WeCan spokeswoman Sarah O'Brien said the organisation had heard from people who felt pressured to sign off on their house repairs when they were unhappy with them.

Fletcher EQR did not hold figures on how many repairs were signed off without the homeowner's agreement.

If a homeowner was dissatisfied with aspects of their repair and refused to sign, their concerns would be noted on the form and dealt with as part of the defect liability process, or referred to the issues resolution team, a spokesman said.

"On some occasions Fletcher EQR/EQC staff and the customer disagree on the repair strategy or the quality of work and we are not able to get the customer's agreement to the sign–off.

"Accredited contractors have agreed to remedy any defective work or materials notified within [the three-month defect liability] period."

- Stuff