Shoddy quake repairs revealed

The Government checked quake repairs on 14 houses and found poor workmanship as well as quality and building code compliance issues in 13 of them.

The result of the investigation is raising concerns with community groups about the Earthquake Commission's quake-repair management process.

Read more: 'Gutsy' report tells EQC to treat customers as people

Fourteen concerned home-owners last year asked the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) to check the quality of their repairs.

EQC had managed repairs for 13 of them, and an insurer had managed repairs for the remaining one. A team of experts found defects including superficial patching of earthquake cracks running through foundation walls, the use of inappropriate building materials and poorly installed exterior brickwork or solid plaster repairs.

Some non-compliance issues were also identified with work completed pre-quake, MBIE said, but this was not the focus of the investigation.

MBIE has launched a broader investigation into repair quality.

EQC Canterbury home repair programme general manager Reid Stiven said the 13 houses were not a representative sample.

"You've got to remember that's 14 homeowners out of 65,000 completed repairs . . . but of course we are always worried about the quality of our repairs and we've always said that we would stand behind quality," he said.

Most of the 13 people who raised concerns with MBIE were already involved in a complaint process with EQC, he said.

"People who are anxious about their repairs . . . will try to take whatever avenue they can."

Stiven said 86 per cent of the home repair programme customer base was satisfied with the repairs.

Canterbury Communities' Earthquake Recovery Network (CanCERN) spokeswoman Leanne Curtis said the results of the investigation were worrying.

"We think some pretty rubbish decisions on assessments have been made," she said.

"We need confidence that the repairs are structurally sound."

There was very little clarity about what went wrong with repairs and who was responsible for potential mistakes.

"We're not interested in the assumption that rubbish work was done by a contractor."

MBIE building system performance branch manager Adrian Regnault said an independent inspection of a sample of 100 houses had been launched into quake repairs done through Housing New Zealand, EQC and insurers.

Inspections would start this month, with findings expected at the end of June. The focus of the inspections would be on structural building work, but would not assess insurance issues or cosmetic defects outside of a building code compliance requirement, such as quality of paint or wall paper finishes.

An Insurance Council of New Zealand spokesman said insurers welcomed the review because they "wanted to be certain they are building safe and sustainable homes for their customers".

Only one of the 14 complaints was to do with an over cap property and it was a minor compliance matter, he said.

REPAIR DEFECTS:

- Quake cracks right through foundation walls superficially patched instead of being replaced or repaired right through

- Inappropriate building materials used in some cases

- Poorly installed exterior brickwork or solid plaster repairs

- Houses remaining out of level after undergoing a re-levelling process

- No fixings to prevent houses sliding off piles in a significant earthquake

- In one case, steel reinforcing rods protruding from concrete foundations, which exposed them to corrosion given their proximity to the sea

- The Press