Short list: Canterbury Earthquake Memorial plans unveiled

SUPPLIED RIVERSIDE PROMENADE: One of the shortlisted options for the Canterbury Earthquake Memorial.

The six shortlisted designs for the multimillion- dollar Canterbury Earthquake Memorial have been unveiled.

Associate Earthquake Recovery Minister Nicky Wagner announced the finalised designs yesterday.

They are:

* Memorial Wall with a reflective pond

Table and Chairs

A Green and Peaceful Landscape

Call and Response

Riverside Promenade

In Memory: A Curved and Inclusive Memorial Wall (previously called Veil of Tears).

The memorial will form part of the Avon River Precinct, between Montreal St and Rhododendron Island, on the corner of Oxford Tce, Lichfield St and Durham St South.

The preferred design will be created using up to $10 million from the Government and $1m from the Mayoral Relief Fund.

Families of those killed in the February 2011 quake and the seriously injured were invited to preview the finalised designs on Sunday. They were chosen from 330 designs from 37 countries.

Mary-Anne Jackson, who survived the CTV building collapse, went along and said all six designs were high quality. She favoured the Memorial Wall because of the alcoves with victims' names inside.

Families could put flowers in the alcoves on anniversaries and birthdays, she said.

"A lot of people liked the promenade with the cherry blossoms . . .but not on that side [Oxford Tce] of the river," she said.

Jackson least preferred the table and chairs option because of the existing 185 white chairs memorial on Madras St.

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) anchor projects development director Rob Kerr said the memorial should provide an experience, rather than simply act as a monument.

The design brief was both or either side of the river.

Victims' families wanted the memorial to include water, greenery and honour those who died, the injured and rescuers.

"The designers have really put a lot of heart and soul into it," Kerr said.

The design needed to be durable. All were within budget and were in a similar cost "ball-park", he said.

Landscape architect Di Lucas was disappointed that five of the six designs involved substantial or tall walling next to the river.

"It is a lovely riverbank site that has been chosen for the memorial. Whilst I appreciate they can be well-engineered and stable, I question their appropriateness in conjuring up a calm and reflective place appropriate for people to quietly reflect on the tragic events that have transformed our city.

"The appropriateness of walled public spaces is also questioned in terms of safety, in terms of people loitering. The city spaces that were so appreciated and felt safe during the quakes were the green spaces; the spaces without walls."

Lucas favoured the table and chairs design, as the 185 white chairs memorial was only temporary.

The public will be asked for feedback on the finalised designs, which will be viewable online and will go on display outside Canterbury Museum on Rolleston Ave from February 24 to March 15, when submissions close.

A Cera panel will then make a recommendation on its preferred design to a memorial leadership group made up of Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel, Wagner, Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage Maggie Barry and Ngai Tahu representatives for approval.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee will make the final decision in May.

Wagner said she hoped the memorial would be at least partially built by February 22, 2016.

- The Press