Should quake memorial chairs go on CTV site?

DAVID WALKER/The Press With the future of the 185 white chairs commemorating those killed in the Christchurch earthquake being discussed, Stuff went out to ask some people their opinion on what should happen.

The 185 white chairs commemorating those that died in the Canterbury earthquakes could become permanent and the artist behind the sculpture wants to put them on the former CTV site.



Artist Peter Majendie created the temporary sculpture in Christchurch city centre in 2012 with a white chair to represent each person that died in the February 2011 earthquakes.

Majendie wants to make the sculpture permanent by casting the chairs in aluminium and putting them on a concrete base.



READ MORE:

* Quake memorial 'says nothing about Christchurch'

* Opinion: Quake memorial can't please all

* Marble quake memorial 'ironic' - survivor

* Editorial: The names are vital for memorial

* Future of memorial chairs uncertain



The current site on the corner of Cashel and Madras streets is owned by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, which has earmarked the site for part of a new rugby stadium.

Majendie favours the nearby CTV site as a possible site for a permanent sculpture, which he believes would cost about $500,000.

"We are keen to see the chairs made permanent in some way. There is a feeling that we would do quite well with fundraising for that. We think that is doable," he said.

Majendie believes the temporary sculpture may have to leave its current site at the end of the year. He would prefer to move the sculpture to the former CTV site, but has not yet made an official approach about the site.

"At the moment we don't have a place for it. There have been thoughts that the museum or the gallery could have it. We are prepared to look at any options."

Iain McGregor The 185 chairs sculpture by artist Peter Majendie could become permanent.

"To me, the CTV building is the obvious site. I don't think it excludes people who lost family members elsewhere around the city."

Mark Maynard, whose wife, Kelly, died in the collapse of the Pyne Gould Corporation building, said the CTV site was a good place for the chairs memorial.

"It is probably the best place because it is where the most people died," he said.

"It makes sense because it is a site where people want to go and remember. There will be the official memorial, so there will be other places to go if people don't like it."

Readers have responded with an outpouring of support to retain the sculpture permanently in the city centre. Commenters on The Press' Facebook page have suggested moving the sculpture to the Botanic Gardens.

Many commenters felt the chairs sculpture was more personal than the permanent memorial design selected by government on Thursday for a site on the Avon river.

"To me, this is a more fitting and more touching memorial than the fancy marble thing they are going to build. It always brings a tear to my eye, especially the baby seat. I'd like it kept somewhere," wrote commenter Liz Odell.

Majendie also believes that any future stadium built in Christchurch should have 185 white seats in the stands.

"It would be 185 white seats in a sea of red at the stadium. I quite like that idea."

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said this week that he did not think the chair memorial should be retained.

"I don't think that's very wise because the loss of life was very wide spread," he said.

"The site may be marked by, perhaps as they do in many other countries, some kind of plaque, but I think shutting sites off, if you had to do that around Christchurch you wouldn't have a lot of places where you can move on."

"There were a lot of people who lost their lives in Cashel Mall, for example, but yesterday we had a splendid gathering of people from Christchurch to greet the prince and you have got to remember that a lot of these places, while you can recognise the loss of life, remain vibrant parts of the city and need to attract people who can engage in all sorts of activities."

Christchurch Central Development Unit acting director Baden Ewart said it would be discussing with Majendie the continued use of the existing site and the potential for use of other sites.

"We recognise the special nature of the installation, and we will do our best to support it," he said.

"The former CTV site is clearly very important, and we are committed to discussing any future use of it with families who lost loved ones there, and other stakeholders, before any decisions are made."

- Stuff