Sir John Hansen is a man with a plan

Kirk Hargreaves Retired High Court Judge Sir John Hansen has become a key figure in Christchurch's recovery story.

How not to begin an interview. Suggest to a distinguished ex-High Court judge - and current chair of the Press Council - that he might be Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee's political puppet.

Sir John Hansen's face, with the habitual impassivity of long years on the bench, shows only a slight tightening. However his eyes are ablaze. Quite frankly, he says, he is insulted. Affronted.

He is the independent chair of an independent hearings panel presiding over the Christchurch Replacement District Plan. Repeat, independent. There is no possibility of any of the panel being tame government appointees there to do someone's bidding.

Ooh, err. Time to wind back. Lamely I offer that some might be floating these kinds of mischievous ideas about town - what with the earthquake recovery having become so politically charged?

We have had the council table of Environment Canterbury (ECan) rolled and not yet returned. Christchurch City Council has seemed under almost constant threat of the same.

Brownlee took control of the city's affairs through the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) - and Hansen happens to have been the convenor of the CER Review Panel which has been reviewing the orders-in-council made under Cera's extraordinary powers these past few years.

Now Hansen has popped up again in charge of a fast-track independent commissioners approach to pushing through the council's new District Plan, a completely crucial document for setting the long-term direction for the social and economic development of Christchurch.

Not only that, but Brownlee has given the specific instruction that the panel pay special attention to the "usability" of any regulations coming out of the council's planning department. And on Thursday, Hansen's panel delivered a fairly stinging first round verdict on its strategy and recovery related chapters.

All shades of the furore in early 2012 over the council's draft central city masterplan - the blueprint for the central business district which Brownlee's office "stress tested" and decided was so wanting that it needed to form the Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) to take over the job.

So maybe it is not so outlandish to speculate … I start to say, quickly halting at the warning glint.

Right, let's wind back to get a better idea of how Hansen has become now a key figure in Christchurch's recovery story. And possibly also consider whether the council does indeed deserve a firmer hand.

SHAPING CHRISTCHURCH'S FUTURE

It was a surprise Hansen even agreed to talk. Judges don't normally do interviews during a hearing. That is part of the definition of being independent, Hansen says pointedly.

But he is giving one because this district plan is so important to shaping Christchurch's future. The review is happening so fast. And people need to be engaged with the process as much as possible.

The thumbnail biography of Hansen is that he is 70, supposedly retired - yet here he is committing himself to the most intense year of work in his life. April 2016, the official expiry date of Cera's powers, is the "must finish" deadline for the plan hearings.

He is a Dunedinite who played Otago club cricket, went overseas to practice law in Hong Kong for a decade - managing the island's cricket team as he rose to be a coroner and judge - before returning to New Zealand in 1988.

Hansen became a High Court judge based in Christchurch. His home is on a block of land halfway between Rangiora and Oxford.

"I've lived longer in Canterbury than anywhere. I might still cheer for the Highlanders but apart from that, I'm red and black, well and truly," he says.

In court, Hansen was known as a tough, no nonsense, type. Directive and a wee bit scary, according to some of the briefs who came before him. Hansen says of himself that he has a reputation as someone who is "hands on" and "gets things done".

His willingness to speak out showed in 2008 when he slammed New Zealand's court system for its creaking delays.

And when in 2009 Dame Margaret Bazley - now the Government-appointed ECan chair - filed her damning report on the legal aid provider, Legal Services Agency, it was Hansen who followed as chair to wind the operation up.

Hansen says he had been expecting then to enjoy a normal semi-retirement. "I had some bits and pieces." Like the Courts of Appeal for the Solomon Islands and Samoa. And the Press Council.

Certainly, before the Canterbury earthquakes, he had not featured prominently in local affairs.

Firstly because while you are a judge, you steer clear of political and commercial entanglements says Hansen, looking at me in a "need I tell you again" kind of way. Then because his interests were either more national or international.

Yet when the earthquakes struck, many immediately saw him as a natural community leader. Straight after the first September 2010 shake, Hansen was approached to head the Red Cross's Earthquake Appeal Commission.

That is a happy memory he says. "It was the biggest charitable fund in New Zealand's history. In the first six weeks we processed something like 50,000 applications and paid out about $42 million dollars in cash grants to people."

The role the Red Cross played was heroic, but also perhaps not so much appreciated at the time because just so much else was going on, Hansen agrees.

So that was a full-on role for him. He then got shoulder-tapped for a second feel-good position, chairing the trust charged with building the AMI temporary stadium in Addington in 100 days, ready for the 2012 Super Rugby season.

"Anyone who was there for the opening and the emotion in the crowd when the Crusaders' horses came out - it was just colossal." A timely morale booster that convinced Christchurch it could collaborate, work quickly to get the city fixed.

As well as these two major recovery jobs, Hansen was also called in to pass an expert eye over Cera's exercise of its emergency powers as part of the CER review panel.

His daily pay rate of $1400 created the one bit of controversy that reached the papers. Hansen says it was a normal fee for a legal opinion and in fact he was only required to work a few hours rather occasionally.

Hansen did almost take a much more public role in Christchurch's early recovery. In December 2011, following approaches from local business leaders, Mayor Bob Parker named Hansen to lead an advisory group of property owners and community organisations who would give input on the central city masterplan.

That went nowhere of course because the Government swiftly formed the CCDU. Yet it shows that Hansen was becoming a go-to guy in the recovery.

Then in 2012, Hansen happened to take on the chair of the Board of Inquiry into the Peka Peka section of the Kapiti Coast expressway - one of the Government's new fast-track consent hearing processes brought in for projects of national significance.

The boards of inquiry have been controversial.

The Government's reasoning is that Resource Management Act (RMA) decisions are being endlessly delayed by Environment Court challenges. Better to short-cut matters by bringing the judges in at the beginning, letting them control the hearings and then deliver verdicts which can only be questioned on points of law.

Green MPs like Christchurch's Eugenie Sage say boards of inquiry are a way to stack RMA outcomes. The environmental protections which are uppermost under the RMA become diluted because of the increased weight being given to economic benefits.

Yet others reply that the consent system was already being gamed by environmental lobbyists as well as business - whoever had the money and time to drag decisions out. Something new was needed.

Anyway, Hansen - already experienced in hearing Environment Court appeals - added another useful tick to his resume in handling these Kapiti Coast hearings. And so he was the obvious choice when a decision was taken to fast-track a replacement district plan for Christchurch in similar fashion.

Insiders say he was not simply a Beehive pick. Incoming Mayor Lianne Dalziel had a warm relationship with Hansen and she had a say in the panel choices. More importantly, the fast-tracking of the district plan was as much to the council's advantage as anyone's.

The old council had been taking a "business as usual" approach, not getting around to re-drafting public planning documents to reflect the new post-quake reality - Christchurch's new hazards, like flooding and rockfall, as well as its changed patterns of suburbs and commercial activity.

Dalziel wanted to use Cera's powers to crack on and get the city's future down on paper.

"For Christchurch, the district plan is a vital exercise to create certainty in the market and so get reinvestment," says Auckland consultant Tim Heath of Property Economics.

Heath says if people don't know the direction and the rules - judge whether a subdivision or office block is going to be wasted money because the council might suddenly focus development elsewhere - then they are just not going to make decisions.

"You've got to be sure your investment isn't going to be undermined by something that is going to be allowed to happen elsewhere in Christchurch."

So while relations between the council and Brownlee have frequently been tense, both sides have been equally clear that the recovery hinges on moving as fast as possible to produce that long-term certainty.

A first gee-up was Brownlee's November 2012 instruction to ECan to draw up a general regional level Land Use Recovery Plan (Lurp). Among other things, that opened up new fringe land for subdivisions.

Then in July 2014, there was an order-in-council to enable hearings on a more detailed Christchurch Replacement District Plan.

Hansen was approached to see if he would take it on. He admits the amount of work was daunting - and has turned out far worse than even he imagined.

One of the complications, a change from usual planning processes, is that the hearing is having to save time by dealing with the draft provided by the council chapter by chapter.

Hansen says normally you would deal with the whole document in integrated fashion. So the panel's skill is going to be in keeping in mind how one part of the plan impacts on another so it comes together in a tidy fashion at the end.

And this particular plan is really a double document. Hansen says district plans last around 10 years. In Christchurch's case, it is thus going to have to act both as the long range strategic thinking, but also as the rather more immediate recovery enabling bit of the changes to existing regulations.

All sorts of temporary activities - like parking containers on the front lawns of homes - need rules to permit them in the short-term. The "exemplar" housing subdivisions on the edges of the city must be pushed through to replace lost homes.

Hansen says making sure the district plan balances both its strategic and recovery goals is going to be the panel's toughest task.

With a groan he gestures at the waist high stacks of submissions the panel is having to wade through. He pulls out his calendar to show the treadmill pace being set.

"We've got a schedule through to July which is basically two weeks of hearings then a week to draft a decision and read for the next chapter."

The effort is going to be Herculean. Hansen says what convinced him to accept the task as much as anything is the calibre of his five fellow panelists.

There is Judge John Hassan. "He's the deputy chair and has spent practically all his working life as a planning lawyer and is now an Environment Court judge."

There is Jane Huria who is Ngai Tahu and an experienced independent director - she worked with Hansen on the Red Cross appeal. Two well respected RMA consultants in Christchurch's Sarah Dawson and Auckland's Dr Phil Mitchell.

The panel is rounded out by John Sax, an Auckland developer of industrial areas, also known for his years of involvement in youth trusts and community housing projects.

Hansen says the panel has an ideal blend of skills and backgrounds. And it has no vested interests, just the good of Christchurch at heart. There are certainly no cosy chats with the Minister about how it might conduct its business.

"We were appointed and let loose basically. His only directive was to appoint us," says Hansen. There can be no further contact except about practical matters - like recruiting extra panelists to cope with the workload. "It would be quite wrong and impossible for it to be otherwise."

The district plan hearings began in December and will be churning through the chapters of the council's draft this year - the panel being set up in its own small office in Manchester St.

Some local RMA lawyers have been concerned that the Christchurch public is on overload. The significance of the district plan may have been overlooked and with the moment passing so fast, people might miss out on their say.But Hansen says he has been pleased to find otherwise. Both the numbers and the quality of the submissions has been high. The seriousness of Christchurch's situation has had a way of focusing minds.

And this week the first shoe dropped. The city can see the tone the hearings will be taking with the panel delivering its verdict on the most urgent chapters - the general strategy statement and the special recovery sections for dealing with consents for temporary activities, multi-unit apartments and exemplar subdivisions.

Brownlee did insert the specific instruction into the hearing's terms of reference that it should insure the district plan is clear and simple to use. And Christchurch City Council has just been marked a fail on that score.

When the panel's batch of decisions was formally handed to the council on Thursday, the strategy chapter was criticised for being "wordy and vague and in many respects ineffective".

Scattered about were complaints of "a lack of quality control", "infelicitous drafting", and the "mixing of policies and objectives".

Insiders say this is not playing politics because the council has been too many times a repeat offender now. Plenty of the submissions attested to this fact.

The panel also commissioned its own expert witness to stress test the council's draft just as Brownlee did the earlier inner city plan.

Mark Chrisp of Hamilton's Environmental Management Services, an honorary lecturer at Waikato University, ran the chapters against four development scenarios.

Chrisp tried to decide from the document whether he would be allowed to build a two-car garage in Papanui, a three unit block in Linwood, a supermarket in Spreydon, and a Marmite factory in Redwood.

He reports that despite his years of experience, he could not navigate his way to find a definite answer on any of these projects. Even with a simple garage, Chrisp says he would have had to seek clarification from the council's planners.

Chrisp indicates this is a criticism of the style and lack of integration in the plan - something that could be fixed if rewritten to give more of a flowchart user's point of view.

But other submissions also point to a more general confusion in the council's mind.

On the one hand, it wants to tighten the city's zoning, be more clear about where particular kinds of development ought to go. Yet rather than stating this crisply in terms of general strategic intentions, it attempts to do so by weaving a clutter of often contradictory and thus ambiguity-introducing rules.

A small example is the way it alternates between the words "consolidation" and "intensification" in clauses talking about commercial zones.

So plainly the complaints about the council's problem with red tape have a basis. And changing that culture might be a tall order.

This is why many of those giving evidence at the hearings are saying in confidence that a no nonsense panel led by a no nonsense judge was the very thing needed to take the city in hand.

The speed of the hearings is uncomfortable. But Christchurch has no choice given it is planning simultaneously for a recovery and its long-term future shape.

The city needs a document which gives people straightforward answers about what is allowed, what is expected, so they can then get on and do it. And over the next year, that is how Hansen and his team is going to be judged.

- The Press