Soil type makes rebuild 'complex' BEN HEATHER

Click to enlarge

Christchurch's central business district is built largely on liquefaction-prone soil, making it "complex and challenging" to construct earthquake-resistant buildings.





A geotechnical report commissioned by the Canterbury earthquakes royal commission says the ground beneath Christchurch's quake-shattered central city sits only one metre to 1.5m above the water table. In addition, it is riddled with underground aquifers and streams.





In the report, Canterbury University associate professor Misko Cubrinovski and Christchurch geotechnical engineer Ian McCahon said the top 25m of soil was a "highly variable" marbling of different layers. Some large buildings sat on firm gravel on one end and silty liquefaction-prone sand on the other.

"These soils are generally considered susceptible to liquefaction, and in some cases (when deposited in a loose state) they exhibit very low resistance to liquefaction."

The February quake caused widespread liquefaction in the inner city, which was particularly severe near the Avon River, the report says.

Within 50m of the river, there was lateral spread of 50 centimetres to 70cm towards the water. Even 150m from the river banks, the ground had shunted.

Liquefaction also seemed to follow the path of old streams buried beneath city streets.

"The zones of more pronounced liquefaction do appear somewhat to line up with the old stream channels, which sheds some light on the reasons for variability in liquefaction manifestation."

The report stopped short of recommending areas where rebuilding should not occur, but said every property would need a detailed geotechnical assessment before any rebuilding could proceed.

"The foundation conditions within the CBD are complex and challenging for geotechnical engineers, particularly in regard to their performance during strong earthquakes."

Buildings on liquefaction-prone soil would need robust shallow foundations often accompanied by deep piles anchored to solid rock 25m below the ground.

While most buildings had performed as expected in the quake, tougher seismic foundation standards needed to be considered.

"One may argue that the current philosophy ... does not address the issues of the overall impact of big earthquakes on a city or a country, and the need for a reasonably quick recovery ..."

The royal commission has commissioned technical reports to assist its investigation into the failure of buildings in the February 22 earthquake covering seismicity, engineering standards and specific buildings. All reports would be examined during the commission's hearings, which start on October 17.

- The Press

Comments