Some EQC complaints open for six months or more

DEAN KOZANIC/FAIRFAX NZ Elissa Urquhart has complaints about EQC that remain unanswered.

More than a quarter of the active complaints lodged with the Earthquake Commission (EQC) have been open for at least six months, with some dating back years.

Frustrated homeowners say they have lost faith in the Government department, while Labour's acting EQC spokeswoman has reiterated her call for a formal inquiry into the organisation.

Documents released to the Labour Party under the Official Information Act show that 146 of the 556 active complaints have been open for six months or more.

A further 136 complaints have not been resolved between 90 and 180 days after being lodged.

The Minister Responsible for EQC, Gerry Brownlee, said the number of active complaints had to be viewed in light of EQC completing about 67,000 repairs.

Linwood homeowner Elissa Urquhart said dealing with EQC for the past five years had been "absolutely horrendous".

She was among the homeowners who complained about one of EQC's top engineers, Graeme Robinson.

"That [complaint] just went completely ignored . . . I'm presuming they just closed it."

Urquhart joined the Anthony Harper group action against EQC and in March 2014 lodged 13 complaints because she wanted a "paper record" of her experience with the organisation.

She said she received a phone call from a Wellington-based complaints manager to say her complaints were being processed.

"Months later . . . I spoke to her again to ask what was happening and she asked 'what complaints' and said she didn't have any."

Urquhart said she received her EQC file until the Official Information Act, which included an email from the complaints manager discussing Urquhart's complaints.

The complaints team had since confirmed it had received the complaints and were processing them, she said.

Mandy Fraser lodged a complaint in 2012 about a "dodgy sign off" of emergency repairs on her mother's Bromley home. The matter is still unresolved.

Fraser also lodged another complaint in August after feeling pressured by two EQC staff members to accept a cash settlement. Fraser claimed the workers arrived at the property and demanded that her elderly mother accept two cheques and sign off her claim.

An EQC spokesman said in the year until September 1, 2015, EQC received 2959 complaints and settled 3131.

He said since this time last year, the average age of the open complaints was 88 days.

"Some of these complaints require a detailed level of scrutiny, comprehensive technical input, involvement by multiple parties or a combination of all three.

"As such, it is expected that time, effort, and attention required to resolve these claims would be greater than a standard claim."

Labour's acting EQC spokeswoman Megan Woods said more than five years on from the September 2010 earthquake, EQC still did not seem able to handle the volume of complaints it received.

"It's not just 146 complaints, it's 146 people whose lives are on hold and this is just the wait for the complaint to be resolved, not for repairs," she said.

Brownlee had argued there was no need for a formal inquiry into EQC's repair standards because the complaints procedure could handle any problems, Woods said,

"Now we learn that complaining to EQC just means further delays."

Brownlee said in some cases the "gulf of opinion" between EQC and the claimant meant complaints took longer to resolve.

"But every effort is being made to reach an agreement or a resolution."

- Stuff