Sonic adventure promised from trio

SUPPLIED The Scots-Australian chamber folk trio, The String Contingent, is at Hamilton's Creative Waikato on Saturday.

Hamilton music lovers can expect a "sonic adventure" when touring acoustic chamber-folk trio The String Contingent perform in the city on Saturday, October 17.

The trio, made up of Australians Chris Stone (violin) and Holly Downes (double bass) and Scotsman Graham McLeod (guitar) crosses several genres.

"You'll hear fiery fiddle playing, tight guitar grooves and the double bass like you've never heard it before," Downes said.

"Our music sits at the intersection of several genres, including Celtic folk, jazz, classical and bluegrass, and is directed by an ethos of musical exploration and a chamber music aesthetic."

It is The String Contingent's third tour of New Zealand, and the trio are hoping for a few less complications this time around.

In 2012 during their second tour, the band's van broke down in Central Otago and the rental company could not sort it out until after the weekend.

With a gig scheduled that night in Oamaru, the band employed some impressive No 8 wire attitude to ensure the show went on.

They split up and hitched their way up and over the mountains through a track affectionately known by locals as "The Pig Root".

Six lifts and 224 kilometres later, they all made the gig, with the double bass travelling in a horse float at one point.

Despite that mishap the band enjoy touring New Zealand and Downes said the spectacular landscape has inspired some of the band's recorded work.

They also credit the New Zealand people as to why they keep coming back and are excited to play for the Hamilton crowd.

Downes said the audience could expect "an up close and personal listening experience".

"We take you on a sonic adventure drawn from our six years of writing, recording and playing together."

Along with the addition of new venues this time round, Hamilton included, the band will also be using a new rental van company.

The String Contingent play at Creative Waikato on Alexandra Street on Saturday, October 17th, 8pm.

- Stuff