Spotlight on Jimmy Neesham as Corey Anderson ruled out of Australian test series

QUINN ROONEY/GETTY IMAGES Corey Anderson remains on the sidelines after suffering a back stress fracture in England in May.

A few fingers and toes will be crossed at New Zealand Cricket headquarters when Jimmy Neesham marks out his run-up for Otago this week.

The gifted allrounder moved into the box seat for the No 6 slot in the Black Caps test side to face Australia in Brisbane on November 5, after Corey Anderson was ruled out of the three-test tour on Monday.

Anderson's slower-than-expected recovery from a double stress fracture in his spine, suffered on the England tour in May, opened the door for Neesham who faces his own fitness watch.

READ MORE:

* De Villiers sparkles in win over India

* Perjury, it's just not cricket

He's down to play for Otago against Central Districts in Napier on Thursday in his first first-class match since January, after which he suffered a back stress fracture. Neesham made a solid return in Zimbabwe in August but had residual back pain, which ensures New Zealand selector Gavin Larsen will be an interested and hopeful observer at Nelson Park this week.

"He's progressing nicely. I was up in Hamilton last week [at the pre-tour camp] and I thought Jimmy ran in really well and bowled with rhythm," Larsen said.

"Everything I saw last week and everything I'm hearing from the high performance guys and Mike [Hesson] is that he's nicely on track. We're hopeful he'll be 100 per cent once we hit Australia."

Neesham bowled six overs for Otago against Canterbury in last week's warmup match and will be on monitored workloads in Napier, but also must show he can play a reasonably full role with bat and ball. Thursday's opening four-day round is the only New Zealand first-class match for the test squad before they fly to Australia next Tuesday.

Outside Anderson and Neesham, both world-class operators on their day, the pace bowling allrounder depth is very thin. That showed with left-arm spinner Mitchell Santner's selection as Anderson's replacement, with the next cab off the rank Colin de Grandhomme also out injured.

"We wanted an allrounder and we believe the next best allrounder in the country is Mitchell Santner. In an ideal scenario we would have had an apples with apples replacement, but that wasn't the case," Larsen said.

Should Neesham suffer a setback then Santner isn't an automatic replacement in the 11. Santner looked the part in his limited overs debut in England in June but isn't yet a test No 6, and would be superfluous as a second spinner at bouncy Brisbane with Kane Williamson also able to chip in some overs.

If, as Larsen put it, the worst case scenario unfolded then Luke Ronchi could come in to bolster the batting, with BJ Watling moving up to six and the Black Caps gambling on three frontline pacemen, spinner Mark Craig and Williamson. The other option is to play four quicks, with Doug Bracewell and Matt Henry both in, but that would shorten up the batting with Watling at six and Craig at seven.

Needless to say, an impressive showing and strong recovery from Neesham this week would ease the one headache for coach Hesson before they board the plane.

Fourteen of the test squad will play Plunket Shield, with skipper Brendon McCullum the only absentee as he testifies in the Chris Cairns perjury trial in London. Northern benefit most, from the presence of Williamson, Watling, new ball pair Tim Southee and Trent Boult, and Santner who will play for New Zealand A on Tuesday before joining the Knights.

Anderson, meanwhile, will continue his recovery with NZC high performance staff in Christchurch with an uncertain return date.

"He's an absolutely pivotal member of our squad so we need to do everything we can to get him back on the park. But more importantly we can't rush it. We've got to have him 100 per cent before he gets back into it," Larsen said.

AT A GLANCE

Black Caps test squad members scheduled to play the first round of four-day Plunket Shield starting on Thursday:

Auckland: Martin Guptill

Northern Districts: Kane Williamson, BJ Watling, Mitchell Santner, Tim Southee, Trent Boult

Central Districts: Ross Taylor, Doug Bracewell

Wellington: Luke Ronchi

Canterbury: Tom Latham, Matt Henry

Otago: Hamish Rutherford, Jimmy Neesham, Mark Craig

- Stuff