Standing up for our human rights PHILIP MATTHEWS

CHRIS SKELTON/Fairfax NZ STANDING UP FOR CHRISTCHURCH: Human Rights Commissioner David Rutherford Relevant offers

Nothing about us without us. In September 2012, a full two years after the first Canterbury earthquake, those words appeared on a handpainted sign during one of the Christchurch school closure protests.

From this distance it seems like just one of many protests within a turbulent year, but there is a fascinating detail. That sentence has some history.

David Rutherford, chief commissioner of the Human Rights Commission, explains that the words "nothing about us without us" have most commonly been used by disability activists. It seems telling that it has crossed over for Christchurch residents who worry that the recovery is being done to them rather than with them.

"In an odd way, the earthquakes have disabled Cantabrians in the same way that disabled people are disabled by attitudes," he says in a meeting room at the commission's central Wellington headquarters.

One of his Christchurch staff took photos during protests and now the sign with those words is immortalised as an illustration in the 184-page report Monitoring Human Rights in the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery.

In the report he wrote that "many people affected by the earthquakes continue to experience deteriorating standards of living and impacts on their quality of life that go beyond the immediate effects of the disaster".

His recommendations included rent controls, warrants of fitness for all rental properties, increased social housing and asking the Ministry of Social Development to increase the level of accommodation supplements to match Wellington and Auckland.

The commission released the report in December. Two months later, Rutherford appeared at a Christchurch City Council earthquake recovery committee meeting, wielding the report and repeating its key finding. That the Christchurch recovery is "New Zealand's greatest human rights challenge".

It seems like a remarkable statement. To clarify, Rutherford circles back to the basis of modern human rights thinking.

In 1941, US President Franklin D Roosevelt talked of the four freedoms - freedom of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want and freedom from fear. Freedom from want is relevant in the Christchurch case, especially the right to an adequate standard of living or adequate housing.

The 1940s was a key decade. It's no accident that Rutherford compares the situation in Christchurch with what the world faced after World War II, or what developing countries face constantly. Imagine Christchurch as a developing country within a developed country.

The struggle for adequate housing, medical care and security is endured daily by people in developing countries. The situation in Christchurch after the earthquakes, or in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, is also a reminder that no-one is immune.

"The big systemic issues we are dealing with in Christchurch are issues for the whole country that the earthquake has just exacerbated," Rutherford says. "Housing is a good example. There are slower forces causing the issues in Auckland."

People keep asking him if there are human rights abuses in Christchurch. "The answer is that we don't really know. We know that people are suffering, particularly in the psychosocial health and mental wellbeing area. But is it any more or less than the new normal that accompanies the recovery phase?"

There needs to be new kinds of people-centred thinking. Some organisations are getting it right, especially the Canterbury District Health Board (CDHB). He has a diagram in front of him of the board's new "world class" people-centred structure with a house in the middle of the picture.

But it only works if the house at the centre is liveable. The right to adequate housing is about more than having a roof over your head. It also includes security of tenure, habitability, adequate services, suitable location, affordability, cultural adequacy and accessibility.

Rutherford put a submission in during last year's Housing Accords and Special Housing Areas Bill. He picked up on what the Productivity Commission said about housing as a "fundamental determinant of wellbeing", central to health, family stability and social cohesion.

He added a fourth area, noting that education is also affected by housing.

"Unless we can stop the churn from house to house, and therefore school to school, we have little chance of addressing the gaps in educational achievement in New Zealand," he wrote.

We could look to Singapore. When Rutherford first visited in 1980, with the New Zealand Universities rugby team, they "stared wide-eyed at kampongs and slums". He went back three decades later and saw how Singapore had been transformed by a social housing programme in which 90 per cent own their own homes. New Zealand could learn a lot

Call him David Rutherford, friend to Christchurch. Even before the release of that major report, he was bringing Christchurch issues to wider attention, putting them before a Government that sometimes seems indifferent to everything except its own determined programme.

He backed Port Hills homeowners, saying "unconscionable" delays were exacting a heavy toll. He urged Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee to extend the deadline for residential red zone offers. He respects the local knowledge of groups like Cancern and Age Concern and says that "obviously the Government is going to be strongly involved [in the recovery] however just about all the great examples have been Canterbury-led and Canterbury developed".

He thinks that at the time of the red zone clearances there was "no comprehensive view" of how a decision in one area might affect another area. "Systems thinking" was required.

"It's not a situation you can simply leave to the market because the market is completely disrupted."

Mental health and housing have emerged as the two big human rights concerns in Christchurch, but how about education? In the period immediately after the earthquakes, schools become the hubs of communities which made the closures seem doubly cruel.

"That comes into human rights in a couple of ways. Schools were central to the sense of community and the reality of community. Initially the Ministry of Education and the schools did a magnificent job but the way the school closures were handled did not take this reality into account."

But the schools issue is outside the scope of his report, as the Ombudsman is tackling it. Same with the Earthquake Commission.

As someone who dips in and out, Rutherford finds it hard to explain the "bipolar" nature of Christchurch to those outside. On one hand, there is incredible opportunity and amazing things happening, and on the other, there is nothing happening.

"It's not a continuum. It's like two worlds."

People outside Christchurch also find it hard to understand how mental health could be so affected by the insecurity of housing, or "the importance of your home to your sense of freedom and personal dignity". He heard one local say that the reason he bought his home is so that no-one could tell him what to do. Since the earthquakes, all manner of people have been telling homeowners what to do.

A side-effect is that in Christchurch the Pakeha middle-class has been made to feel as insecure as everyone else. This has shown up in mental health statistics. Just this week, the CDHB released figures showing that psychiatric presentations are at an all-time high, with a 35 per cent increase in new patients over the past two years.

"That's alarm bells from Hurricane Katrina," he says. "More people died of complications from cancers, strokes and heart attacks, and suicides, than were killed in the initial disaster."

In his view, there are things that need to be urgently acted on. One is the Cancern concern about the estimated 900 households who will be stuck for another winter in unliveable homes. They are stoic and sometimes hard to find.

There is also the hope that the Residential Advisory Service can be expanded. Age Concern has pushed that, knowing how the service can act as a navigator.

"There are people out there who have got piles of

correspondence that they haven't read because they just don't know where to start," Rutherford says. "We need people to help those people."

How did Rutherford end up here? His parents were Irish immigrants. One was a teacher and one was a social worker. In other words, there is a way in which this role was almost an inevitability.

He grew up in Te Aroha and Patea and got to see "another side of life". At school, a guidance counsellor told him he could go into law or social work. He already knew that social work was tough so he studied law at Victoria University.

He went through a law firm and into the management of a building company where it never occurred to him that there could be a human rights dimension to building. Similarly, back in the 1970s, human rights law was not on the agenda at universities.

He was based for a time in Christchurch, working as a manager at Wrightson Limited, before the New Zealand Rugby Union hired him as chief executive in 1999. He resigned after New Zealand failed in a bid to sub-host the 2003 tournament with Australia. Many saw his resignation as an act of personal integrity that is rare in New Zealand business.

He went back to university and got his Masters. He apologises for the arcane topic - "How European human rights in competition law would shape the future of professional rugby union".

He went on to work for Special Olympics, first as a local chairman and board member and then as president and managing director for the Asia Pacific region, based in Singapore. It was the best job he has ever had but his family stayed back here and he wanted to return. When Rosslyn Noonan stepped down as chief commissioner of the Human Rights Commission in 2011, she told him to apply.

Looking back, a few things pushed him towards it. On the board of Special Olympics, there were five athletes with intellectual disability. He watched them out-argue moguls of global business and it changed his view of what was possible.

He led a parents' campaign against serious bullying and abuse at Hutt Valley High School that he remembers as "a mission". He said at the time that the police did a good job but other state agencies failed. It got him thinking.

"It could have happened anywhere and it has since," he says. "It's just that it got publicity. That school has sorted itself out."

That campaign, and his public criticism of broadcaster Paul Henry's use of the word "retarded" to describe singer Susan Boyle, happened before he was officially with the Human Rights Commission. It was as though he was auditioning for the role.

He is now halfway through his five-year term. Noonan did two terms. It's too early to say whether Rutherford would also want a second go.

He was hired by former Justice Minister Simon Power and now reports to Justice Minister Judith Collins and says he has "not really" had communication from her about things she doesn't like. Sometimes they are even in agreement.

Was there any criticism from the Government over the claim that Christchurch is our greatest human rights challenge?

"No, it's sort of obvious that it is. Christchurch has got all the normal human rights issues and then it's had an earthquake which has per se made the vulnerable more vulnerable."

But the Government was less impressed by his views on mass surveillance.

Last year, the Human Rights Commission called for an independent inquiry into New Zealand's intelligence agencies after submissions closed on the Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB) and Telecommunications Bill. The report went straight to Prime Minister John Key.

Key, who also happens to be the minister responsible, was not happy. The commission "needs to pull [its] socks up if it is going to continue to be a Government-funded organisation and should meet the deadlines like everyone else", he said. Many took that as a not-so-veiled threat.

"The Human Rights Commission is unlikely to be popular with whoever is in power," Rutherford says.

"That's the nature of the beast. It's usual that there is strong disagreement and the mass surveillance issue was a good example.

"In Christchurch there has been quite public concern from time to time about what the commission is up to. The minister with responsibility often finds him or herself needing to defend the commission."

Rutherford also criticised the Government's postponement of Environment Canterbury (ECan) elections, saying that "local communities are already traumatised by measures introduced in response to the earthquakes" and that it "reinforces the inability of those directly affected to contribute" to legislation that affects them.

"We were quite strong on the fact that they should have gone for what the officials recommended, which was a mixed system moving towards full representation," he says. "Not unexpectedly, there was some real feeling about what we were saying. But it was all in public, at the select committee, not from any minister.

"It was the same with the Prime Minister's comments, they were public. That's better. One thing I like about Minister Brownlee is you know where you are."

There is a bill going through Parliament to amend the commission slightly and Rutherford says "there is some concern in civil society that it might be interfering with us more. We've got to worry about those sorts of things."

Are there subtle forms of pressure and guidance? He says that both Power and Collins have stressed that the commission needs to focus on "a limited number of priorities".

An organisational review found there were "definite areas to improve, particularly around being relevant to the issues of the day".

In that sense, Christchurch seems important to him. As does mass surveillance. "That wasn't on our work programme."

You can sense the shadows of bigger political tensions behind some of Rutherford's careful words. Which is why it must be almost refreshing when arguments spill out into the public arena.

Key's spat last year was one example and there was also the case of MP Nick Smith in 2012.

The subject of ECan representation came up at a parliamentary committee. Rutherford said that democracy was something that New Zealanders went to war for. Smith thought that he meant he was saying the Government were Nazis.

"Nick reacted strongly. I hadn't said it in the way he interpreted it. I just said, these are fundamentally important rights, these are what we fought and died for.

"It was around Armistice Day and people were wearing poppies, which was part of the reason I said it."

He smiles. He knows that people in Christchurch got it.

- The Press

Comments