State housing quake repairs below target ASHLEIGH STEWART

Repairs on Christchurch's crippled state housing stock are failing to keep pace as deadlines loom for the work.

The Christchurch City Council and Housing New Zealand (HNZ) are lagging behind forecasted repair targets, and neither met first-year goals on repairs to their social housing units.

In February last year HNZ set itself a 2015 deadline to have up to 5000 tenanted properties repaired - with 2000 to be completed in the first year.

However, its 1000th repair was marked only last week.

HNZ says work will increase in the months ahead after the most difficult repairs are completed.

For HNZ to meet its target, it would need to repair 147 homes a month, or 36 a week.

The same deadline was imposed for the New Build 700 scheme, which aims to replace 700 earthquake-damaged HNZ homes.

Twenty of these homes have been completed in about a year. A further 342 are either contracted or under construction.

HNZ general manager Canterbury earthquake recovery and redevelopment Paul Commons said he did not "underestimate the challenge".

"Both our repair and rebuild programmes are being managed on the required scale to achieve those targets," he said.

"As we progress to the next 1000, next 1000 and next 1000 after that, the time it takes to do the repairs will reduce and we expect this to be reflected in the number of repairs we complete, as we track through the rest of this year and through to the end of 2015."

Housing Minister Nick Smith said he was "keeping an eye" on HNZ, but still had faith in it to deliver the 5000-home target.

"I'm quite confident about the pace. I don't think many people appreciate in the construction industry the amount of front load work that's required to do a project," he said.

He said HNZ's progress should be compared with other repair schemes in the private and public sector.

"An honest assessment would have you draw the conclusion that Housing Corp has made more progress post earthquake in getting its houses repaired than those either in the private sector or those owned by council."

The council initially set itself a goal of completing 300 repairs in 2013.

In July, it signalled that it would not meet the target, because of the time it was taking to reach damage settlements with the Earthquake Commission (EQC) - a claim EQC strongly refuted.

The deadline lapsed and only about half of the promised repairs had been completed.

Since January 2013, the council has fixed 177 units, bringing the total repaired to 290.

Council unit manager community support Carolyn Gallagher said there were still 1549 units open awaiting repairs.

More than 200 units were sitting empty, awaiting assessment on whether they would be repaired.

A new target for the repairs would be set when a portfolio settlement had been reached with EQC, Gallagher said.

BY THE NUMBERS

Christchurch City Council repairs to social housing units:

Repaired to date: 290

To be repaired: 1549

Still to be assessed: 205

Awaiting demolition: 479

Housing New Zealand social housing units:

Repaired to date: 1021

To be repaired: (About) 3979

Still to be assessed: 60

Awaiting demolition: 135





- The Press

Comments