Street repairs ignoring upgrade plans NICOLE MATHEWSON

Contractors repairing some Christchurch streets have been asked why they are not doing promised upgrades at the same time.

The Christchurch Central Development Unit's (CCDU) plan for the city after Canterbury's earthquakes promised to upgrade Salisbury St from one-way to two-way traffic and add cycle lanes, more vegetation and an eco-friendly stormwater system.

However, the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Repair Team (Scirt) has begun returning the street to the same condition it was in before the earthquakes, leaving the upgrade until later.

A Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) spokesman said funding for the Salisbury St upgrade was "still to be worked through", along with the design detail and it was not yet known when the work would start.

Peterborough Village spokeswoman Di Lucas said the residents' group was disappointed the plans seemed to have been put on hold.

"It seems sensible that when you get to change it . . . that you would do that as part of repairs, but Scirt has gone in and is just replacing like for like," she said.

She was concerned authorities would be reluctant to demolish the new kerbs for the upgrade, and worried the upgrade plan would be abandoned.

"It shouldn't be a retro-fit; it should be designed from the beginning. It seems sad to waste money in this way and we can't afford to waste money."

Hagley-Ferrymead Community Board chairwoman Sara Templeton said the board unanimously decided last week to pass on its concerns to the Christchurch City Council's chief executive and councillors.

"We want information on how the transport plan and the repairs can be aligned," she said. "We've tried to bring it to attention in the past and we've been assured, but nothing has been happening."

Templeton said there were similar issues in other parts of the city, including Humphreys Drive in Ferrymead, which was undergoing repairs without consideration of rising sea levels and flooding issues. "It's disruptive to residents if it has to be done twice, not to mention the cost. It just doesn't seem to make sense."

A Scirt spokeswoman referred The Press to the council for comment.

"Scirt does the work it is funded for and agreed with its funding bodies - central and local [government]," she said.

Council transport and research manager Richard Osborne said recovery agencies were working to align rebuild projects where possible, but competing demands and planning timeframes meant it was not always possible.

"Sometimes repair work must push ahead."

The Salisbury St upgrade was not part of the first phase of projects identified in the CCDU's recovery plan and its design and funding would be delivered "at a later date", he said.

- The Press

Comments