Community leaders burned out by the earthquake recovery are being sought to take part in a supportive project aimed at keeping them healthy and active.

"We want to capture 30 people doing amazing stuff but who are not recognised and are at risk," project principal Chris Jansen said.

The Leadership in Communities Project (Linc) will not burden community leaders with more projects, Jansen stressed. Leaders already have plenty of those, he said.

Rather Linc will acknowledge leaders' efforts, provide forums for sharing experiences, mentoring and training. After 10 months, it's hoped that attendees will be more effective, connected and motivated to lead their community.

Applicants should be leaders in geographical areas such as suburbs or among communities of interest including sport, culture and start-ups.

The 30 successful would be joined by 10 staff from governmental organisations such as Cera, city council, Canterbury District Health Board.

"Normally these two groups don't work together," another Linc principal, Chris Mene, said.

He hoped both groups would gain insights into the other's situation and would collaborate on projects in future.

Linc grew out of a Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) strategy called Community in Mind, which acknowledged that the rebuild was not just about buildings and roads but psychosocial recovery in communities. Cera is a funder, along with the Red Cross, the Wayne Francis Trust, the Tindall Foundation, the Ministry of Social Development and others. There is funding for three groups of 40 over three years.

The programme is free for participants and the time commitment is about one day a month on average for 10 months.

It is targeted at people including Jane Harrison and Dianna Donald co-chairs of the South Brighton Community Association. The pair took a break this winter from co-ordinating the community response because they were burned out. Linc "ticks all of the boxes. They're using our knowledge," Harrison said.

Applicants don't have to be completely burned out to be eligible. "It's for the invisible people who are completely vital," Jansen said.

Applications close September 26. More info: lincproject.org.nz

- The Press

Comments