Surge of rebuild workers predicted

An additional 8000 construction workers will be needed for the Canterbury rebuild in the next three years, a report says.

Most of the new jobs will be in commercial projects or infrastructure, the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE) predicts.

The construction boom has raised questions about whether the city will be able to provide enough affordable accommodation for workers.

Migrants were filling most of the existing positions but beneficiaries finding jobs were contributing, MBIE's quarterly "job-matching" report said.

Students in industry training will also help to fill the positions.

An estimated 30,000 construction workers were on the payroll in greater Christchurch at September this year - double the number before the earthquakes.

The work force was 38,000 when the reconstruction peaked in December 2016, analysts said.

Forecasts were based on Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority projections of work to be done on the residential rebuild and repairs, infrastructure and commercial work.

Tenants Protection Association manager Helen Gatonyi said trying to fit another 8000 workers into Christchurch would put further pressure on the city's housing market.

"There's just not enough houses for them and accommodation."

Many of those already here were having trouble finding affordable accommodation, with average rents still well above what they were before the earthquakes.

"Every time there's a new influx of people, the rents start going up again."

Gatonyi said some employers were talking about providing accommodation for their workers but it was important to think about "social supports" and the possible impact on host communities as well.

MBIE expected housing supply this month would return to pre-earthquake levels but more accommodation would be needed in the next three years.

Overall, tightness in the housing market would steadily ease until September 2017, after which Canterbury could face an over-supply of houses as rebuild workers left.

"This will lead to a reduction in the price of housing stock and reduce the speed at which new developments are built", MBIE said.

It could not guess the size and length of any housing oversupply once the market re-balanced.

The MBIE report said commercial projects would become increasingly important to the Canterbury economy as earthquake-related residential repairs and new home building fell away.

Construction companies were saying the bulk of the residential work would be finished by the end of 2017 and may be mostly finished by 2019.

Much of the later work would be for people waiting to spend their cash settlements once the bulk of the rebuild had been completed.

There would also be "business as usual" repairs and upgrades that had been deferred because to the rebuild, MBIE said.

The value of the construction sector's work was expected to peak in the December 2016 quarter at about $1.6 billion.

Commercial builder Anthony Leighs said he had some concerns about the city's "ability to resource through the peak period", which he agreed would happen in 2016.

His company was "working very hard" to ensure it had enough staff as the rebuild ramped up and was looking at various strategies, including employing more people directly and making greater use of subcontractors.

Leighs said he was aware the opportunities created by the earthquakes would not last forever, and it was important to make sure any jumps in worker numbers would not be followed by massive redundancies.

"We're taking a longer-term sustainability view," he said.

- The Press