Sutton considers his future

DEAN KOZANIC/Fairfax NZ CERA CEO: Roger Sutton

Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) chief executive Roger Sutton says he is considering his future after an allegation he sexually harassed a staff member.

The allegation accuses Sutton of harassing a senior female staffer, including making inappropriate jokes, comments and giving her an unwelcome hug.

A State Services Commission inquiry into the claims by a staff member is expected to deliver a finding next week. The inquiry has taken about seven weeks.

Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee refused to comment last night.

"I was aware there was an inquiry but I haven't seen the report. Without seeing the report I'm not going to comment on it."

Sutton, a flamboyant cycle-riding face of the recovery authority, said last night he could not talk about details of the complaint although The Press understands he has disputed some of the allegations or the alleged intention behind his behaviour.

"I can be a larrikin and make stupid silly jokes. It is a very difficult, stressful job and I've sometimes used humour to cope. I wish this wasn't happening and I was horrified when I learned about it [the allegations]," he said.

"But I'm not the victim. I've made some stupid mistakes."

He had no complaints about the inquiry process and said he felt he was being treated fairly and had every confidence it would come to a "fair and proper conclusion".

"I realise a chief executive in the public service has high thresholds of behaviour and sometimes I have not met those standards.

"I have behaved in a juvenile and stupid way and I'm not proud of that.

"I'm an over-the-top, out-there sort of person and that has often made me successful in this role but it is also my Achilles heel."

Sutton said he hadn't decided what he would do but would decide his future over the next few days.

He would come into work on Monday. "I'm still the chief executive."

He would not be pressed on whether continuing in the role was an option. He went on to say: "This episode which I have caused is making me think what I will do next year.

"Over the last three years I have showed compassion and understanding and humanity to my community and I'm really proud of that.

"I'm proud of what I've achieved in my role but there are still lots of challenges and I've really enjoyed working with the great team of people at Cera.

"I'm just someone who had made some mistakes."

The State Services Commission has refused to answer almost any questions on Sutton.

However it did confirm yesterday that at no point had he been stood down from the role of chief executive.

Asked whether State Services Commissioner Iain Rennie met with Sutton yesterday, a spokesman said the question would be considered as an Official Information Act request, meaning the answer would likely be delayed by four weeks.

Sources said the commission was planning to make an announcement on Sutton early next week, timed to coincide with the Labour leadership vote.

THE ROGER SUTTON FILE

Sutton became Christchurch's quake recovery czar in May 2011 when he was appointed Cera chief executive for a five-year period.

Then Orion's chief executive, his handling of the power lines company's staff working long hours to restore electricity to the city post-quake impressed many.

His honest communication skills also received praise.

Sutton initially refused to consider the Cera job when his name was first mooted in early March 2011.

But two months later, he took a $200,000 pay cut, replacing interim chief executive John Ombler in the role.

At the time, Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said Sutton's appointment would "speed the recovery process".

Sutton was chief executive at Orion from 2003 to 2011, when he took over at Cera.

He graduated from the University of Canterbury with a Bachelor of Engineering in 1986.

A vocal advocate of inner-city cycling, he often makes a point of cycling to appointments around town.

He told The Press in June that he did not think he would continue as Canterbury's earthquake boss beyond 2016, when the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act 2011 expires.

Central government would continue to have "some sort of presence in Christchurch" after that time, he said.

- The Press