The hidden story of city's rebuild JOHN MCCRONE

STACY SQUIRES/FAIRFAX NZ WORK IN PROGRESS: The story of Christchurch's rebuild is still very much being written, say Collier's Jonathan Lyttle, left, and Ryan Geddes.

Even six months ago, the rebuild of central Christchurch was on the cusp.

The city's 40 or so A-grade tenants - the lawyers, banks, accountants and professional services firms - at last had pens in hand, finally ready to sign their lease documents.

But construction costs had soared 20 to 30 per cent during the 18 months while their prime location building projects were being steered from initial concept drawing to detailed design.

Did the lease terms still stack up for the property owners? Were the promised rentals enough to actually forge ahead?

Jonathan Lyttle, Christchurch general manager of commercial real estate specialist Colliers International, says it was another jelly-ish moment in the hidden story of the city's rebuild.

Developers could have been forced to pull the plug because they were being asked to take too big a hit.

"We know one client who has just built a building in Christchurch and the same building in Auckland - same use, same type - and it was 23 per cent more expensive in Christchurch."

Lyttle says after all the effort of getting the deals in place, it was close run thing on a number of office blocks.

"These landlords should be given medals because any margin they had was decreasing right through to the time the leases could be turned unconditional."

Indeed one flagship project, Michael Ogilvie-Lee's $100 million glass-wrapped Triangle Centre at the corner of Cashel and Colombo St, did fall over just after Christmas.

Fortunately this development was picked up by Hallensteins rich-lister Tim Glasson with the anchor tenants, ANZ Bank and engineers Beca, still attached. In June, the contracts on a more modestly priced building, said to be $70m, were sealed.

Lyttle shakes his head. You have no idea of the fun and games behind the scenes these past three years, he says.

TOUCH AND GO

Immediately after the earthquakes, reports commissioned by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) said the central city was well insured but warned that Christchurch's property owners were mostly family investors rather than commercial developers.

They could be expected to drop by the wayside while the rebuild was financed from Auckland, Australia or Asia by large property conglomerates.

In fact precisely the opposite has happened, says Lyttle.

While Cera was doing the rounds with its investment road show trying to drum up interest elsewhere, locals have not just reinvested but doubled up, many borrowing heavily to get their $30m or $100 replacement buildings off the ground.

And they have hung in even as any reasonable margin has been eaten away by the runaway construction bills.

"If you were to run a commercial ruler over most of the central city you would say you wouldn't do it. There are examples of people getting half of what they should as a normal return, which is absolutely eye-watering at these levels of investment."

Lyttle's office sales colleague Ryan Geddes agrees it was touch and go for some even just a few months back. But now he says the city rebuild is "locked and loaded". There is 50,000 square metres of office space signed for and another 38,000sqm with conditional agreement.

Geddes says if you want to visualise it, that is like 10 Forsyth Barr towers' worth of low-rise glassy blocks going in down by the Avon River and back up through the City Mall area by the end of 2017. At last Christchurch can heave a sigh of relief.

Well, perhaps not quite, says Lyttle. That might be the A-grade tenants sorted, however now we have to stack up the B and C grade building projects. Plenty of gaps remain to be filled.

Lyttle says land in the city still costs as much as ten times what it does out at Addington. And if construction prices seem crippling already, what are they going to be like in another year once the convention centre and other civic anchor projects begin to suck up local labour?

LAST HURDLES

Then there is the question of the East Frame where Cera needs to find developers willing to fill four whole blocks of land with inner city apartment complexes. Will the residential half of the central city vision get across the line financially?

The story of Christchurch's rebuild is still very much being written, says Lyttle.

Yet as Geddes says, the key tenancies are locked and loaded, the last hurdles negotiated. So a few more war tales about what has been going on behind the scenes can probably be safely revealed now.

As the go-between whose job it is to connect landlords to tenants, Lyttle has had the inside track on plenty of the central city's big money projects - both those that are happening and the many more that bit the dust along the way.

Lyttle says there are shelves of glossy architectural drawings for developments which did not make it. And he reckons the most significant would have to be that of Cathedral Square.

Back in mid-2011, while the ground was still shaking, the central business district (CBD) still sealed off by the civil defence cordon, a group of property owners banded together in a bid to focus the rebuild on what seemed the city's natural heart.

Lyttle racks his memory for the names involved. There was Ganellen who rushed out a jazzy building design - the "roll of books" - for the old Press site. There was Philip Carter with his various Cathedral Square properties and other local family investors like Andy Macfarlane and the Cristo group.

The idea was to ring Cathedral Square with five or six big new buildings, about $ 1/2 billion in investment, that would mop up most of the city's A-grade tenants in one fell swoop. Everyone that counted back in the same place.

Banks like ANZ and BNZ seemed onboard with the proposal. Architectural plans were swiftly produced. "The buildings were uber high-spec. They would have had their place anywhere in the world," says Lyttle.

It was going to be properly done. Expat landscape architect Sam Martin - fresh from London's Battersea Power Station redevelopment project - was recruited to sketch how it would work as a precinct.

Lyttle says rather than a circle of blank-faced office blocks, the buildings would have had ground floor shops and cafes spilling out into Cathedral Square, creating a lively European plaza feel.

And Worcester Blvd was going to be revamped as the "red carpet" access route - the rebirth of the traditional axis of the city.

Martin suggested a living street with markets and activities connecting Hagley Park and the Arts Centre at one end to Christ Church Cathedral and this new commercial hub at the other.

Imagine, says Lyttle. We could have had a Christchurch with a quite different geography. And open for business by 2015 if the plan had gained traction. But instead the central city story went off in another direction.

UNCERTAINTY

Several factors scuppered the Cathedral Square proposal, he says. One was the fact the Square lay so deep inside the cordon.

"At this stage nobody could get back into the red zone to look at the space. We were pitching it as if it were on another planet."

The uncertainty over the fate of the Cathedral was another issue. The Square precinct would somewhat lose its logic without it.

Then Lyttle says you have to remember that at the time many were openly doubting that central Christchurch could even get rebuilt. After four big shakes, and another to follow in December, the talk was of land swaps with Hagley Park or shifting the entire CBD out to the good land around the airport.

Lyttle reveals a Colliers survey of tenants' intentions in late 2011 found that nearly half were thinking they might have to resettle permanently in suburban office parks like Addington or Burnside.

And why not, he says, given it looked like it would years even to demolish the tangled mess of the CBD, while in 18 months they could have their own purpose-built low-rise surrounded by as much car-parking as they could want on cheap fringe land?

Lyttle says it did not help that the city council was running around trying to draw up a draft masterplan for the central city that inspired little confidence in the business community.

Don't underestimate how out of touch with reality the council seemed says Lyttle. The proposed development rules called for tight restrictions on office car parking. The push was on for light rail and cycleways instead.

"They thought everyone was going to start riding a bike to work. But this is Christchurch. We are a driving city," Lyttle protests.

The council plan also lacked definition of where building would be concentrated, so returning businesses risked finding themselves the sole occupier of some still abandoned street.

"The plan was sprawling. There was no control. All they did was take a map of the old Christchurch and write a set of best practice ideals over it."

Lyttle says the rebuild was on another cusp right there, rather a major one. And so to another moment of secret history.

BLANK CANVAS

A chicken and egg situation had developed for tenants. They could see the CBD had effectively become a blank canvas.

With almost every large building coming down, they could chose to go back anywhere they wanted. Money could pick its own spot.

But by the same token, being a blank canvas, the tenants had to wait to discover where those best spots would be. They were not about to sign a seven to 10-year lease without being certain it was the right choice.

Someone had to give them a nudge says Lyttle. So in October 2011, Colliers organised its own project, Re:Lease.

Lyttle says they gathered together the Lane Neaves, Deloittes, Becas and Anderson Lloyds - all the city's A-grade tenants - in the one room on the top floor of the HSBC tower in Worcester Blvd.

Lyttle says this was deliberate. Start by proving they would feel safe again in a tall building. Then the question was what did they want, where would they like to go?

"The problem was the property owners were focused on reinstating their individual properties and so were talking to the tenants in isolation.

"But by presenting to the tenants as a group, what it did was give them immediate confidence that they all were going to make the same decisions about what was going to be the right area to go back into."

And Lyttle says if the collective wish had been Addington or the airport, then at least a common direction would have been clear.

However the idea of returning en masse as a tight group, homing in on one location rather than being scattered about, was taken as obviously sensible.

"People could immediately see there was strength in numbers and a collaborative approach would ensure its success.

"You couldn't flick a switch and turn the city back on in one go, but seed the commercial heart and the other things would follow."

Some bottom-lines emerged too. Cera would need to prioritise the demolitions and infrastructure repairs in the chosen corner of town to limit the time it was a dusty reconstruction zone - and Cera naturally had no problem with that says Lyttle.

The A-grade tenants also wanted their car parking. They got that after Cera took over control of the central city through the Blueprint masterplan which did away with the proposed parking restrictions.

Geddes says in pre-quake Christchurch, buildings averaged one car park to every 300sqm of office space. With its new buildings, the balance is going to be more like 1 to 75sqm.

So by the time of the second Re:Lease meeting in December 2011, a quiet understanding had been sorted. There was the firm promise of enough takers to fill about 10 prime city buildings. A necessary critical mass.

Lyttle says attention could then turn to where on the map they wanted to go - which property owners were going to strike it most lucky.

Fast access for construction was a key requirement, which is why the edges of the cordon became the obvious choice. After that, everyone wanted to be river-front if at all possible.

"That has always been the popular place. Historically the Avon and the office space around it has had less than 2 per cent vacancy rates," Lyttle says.

DELIVERY TO FOLLOW

It took a lot longer than anticipated to get the wheels moving. Lyttle says Cera's Blueprint, with its compulsory land acquisitions, its wrangles over civic anchor project cost-sharing, its late arriving transport chapter, ate up nearly two years.

Yet if you look at where the A-graders are going, having finally sealed their contracts, it is down both sides of the Avon from Gloucester St bridge to the Bridge of Remembrance, then back up through City Mall.

"It is pretty much exactly what we envisaged from the beginning."

So from the public's point of view, Lyttle agrees the central city rebuild has often seemed stalled.

"But people haven't stopped in three years. It's easy to sit on the outside and say nothing's happened when actually everything's happened. The CBD has been committed and is now under construction - delivery to follow."

- The Press

Comments