The quake's long term toll JOHN MCCONE

In sport they talk about hitting the wall. The body says the slogging has gone on long enough. Then the mind treacherously agrees it could be time to chuck it in.

Motivation appears spent. The concentration just isn't there. Even if you keep pushing, the returns are diminishing. And all you can think about is how far there is yet still to go.

After a year, this is how many people around Christchurch and Canterbury confess they are feeling about the earthquake recovery.

"I often hear that people's tanks are running on empty, that people's emotional reserves are exhausted," says Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce chief executive Peter Townsend.

"I've spent the past two weeks feeling like I would like to stay in bed," admits Leanne Curtis of the Canterbury Communities' Earthquake Recovery Network (CanCern).

They describe the symptoms of brain fade, wading through mental mud, going through the motions, becoming easily flustered as the stresses of the day start to build. It is not a diagnosable condition like post-traumatic stress disorder or generalised anxiety disorder, just the sense that the appetite to cope is wearing thin.

And it is normal. It should come as no surprise as it is what the experts were warning: a natural disaster like an earthquake follows a recognised sequence of psychological stages.

First off is the shock of the event itself. Stunned, numb and unbelieving. Then the adrenaline- fuelled heroic phase, the crisis mode, where everyone pitches in to respond.

This is followed by the honeymoon and taking stock phase, where people are feeling thankful for what is being done. Energy levels and goodwill are not a problem. And even if there has been great loss and tragedy, everyone is vowing to rebuild fast, rebuild better.

But about six months down the line, just as inevitably arrives the disillusionment phase. The true difficulties of the recovery process are becoming apparent. The wider world has moved on to its other problems, while locally, self- interest and old divisions are reasserting themselves.

For a community's leaders especially, complexities that had once looked merely daunting are becoming potentially overwhelming. Obstacles appear entrenched, beyond the individual power to alter.

Vicious circles can start to develop that bring a person down. Tired minds take longer to do what they should, leaving even less time for refreshing breaks. Exercise and family are put on the backburner. Spare moments are used for those deserved rewards - a drink or two more than usual, or time wasted on a couch in front of a television.

The experts are not too comforting about how long it lasts either. On their graphs, the disillusionment period is marked on a scale that stretches out for some years. The recovery is not a sprint, a quick dash back to normality, but the psychological equivalent of a marathon. And a marathon with some steep hills.

Perhaps with the winter over and spring blossoming, one of those tougher stretches might be falling behind the region now. The All Blacks provided a welcome lift. There is now the further distraction of an election, the return of Cup and Show week and fast approaching, the promise of the Christmas break.

People are also learning to adjust to the pace of the recovery. As a matter of self-preservation, they are mentally recalibrating what needs to be done, what they can do, getting it in a fresh perspective so as to be able to deal with their fluctuating energies and moods. Professor Bruce Glavovic of the Massey University Joint Centre for Disaster Research says people need to remind themselves just what an event they are living through.

Glavovic, who has been visiting Christchurch regularly to get an outsider's view on the region's recovery process, says natural disasters like earthquakes are somewhat down the scale in terms of psychological trauma, compared to wars or man-made disasters. They are not so compounded by blame and other factors.

But the Canterbury earthquakes have some pretty extreme features. For a start, it is rare for a damaging earthquake, like September 4, to be followed by a still more serious one, like the February 22 shake, not to mention the further June 13 double hit.

As natural disasters, the quakes have also been unprecedented in their economic and social impact on a nation. Christchurch was New Zealand's second city and nowhere else has a town lost so much of its familiar suburban shape or its whole civic heart to liquefaction and destruction.

"Proportionately, this has had a more devastating effect. In Christchurch, you are dealing with 1200 buildings down in the centre. And that impacts not just in terms of business, but the iconic places and markers that people connect with culturally and spiritually," says Glavovic.

So the reconstruction task for Canterbury is bigger. And the ground has literally not settled. Glavovic says this is creating three on-going sources of stamina- sapping uncertainty.

There is the obvious seismic risk - how do you do anything definite when you are half-waiting for another big one to hit? And even if people want to speed forward with the rebuilding, the insurance industry and others are planting a foot on the brakes.

This then creates a continuing uncertainty over livelihoods - "The choices that individual home-owners have to make, and individual business people have to make." Glavovic says people are having to make big decisions about their futures, yet are working mostly on hopes and promises rather than hard information, and this gets draining as the months wear on.

Then also, says Glavovic, there is the confused politics of the rebuild.

Much as everyone wants to pretend Cantabrians are pulling together in hard times, people can see that the local councils, the Government's Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera), and the business community are not working together smoothly as yet.

There is a group of parties treating each other as stakeholders, rather than a partnership sitting united around the same table to make decisions.

It all adds up to produce a background of worry and tension, says Glavovic. People have a right to feel weary and disillusioned, even if they are trying hard not to be.

Christchurch Mayor Bob Parker agrees that mentally the recovery has reached a tough stage. The "not finished" aspect is telling on people.

"You have an oil spill: you pump the oil out of the ship, you clean the beaches, you move on. You have a bush fire: you rebuild the houses, you replant the trees, you move on.

"But we've had an event that is not yet completed. We can't escape the feeling that it might not be over, that in the next 30 minutes we might experience another violent earthquake. And that uncertainty is the source of a lot of the frustrations that people are having," says Parker.

The aftermath is its own second psychological story, another kind of test following the actual earthquakes, which is demanding further learning and adjustments of expectations.

"I think the one thing we all probably have in common is the thought that it is taking a long time. Probably it was always going to take a long time, but we live in a world where it has become 'instant everything'," he says.

"If you've got a pain, you can go to the doctor and get a tablet. You want a flat-screen television, you can go and get a special deal at one of the outlets.

"But the reality here is there is no instant fix."

Parker says allied to this is the loss of feelings of familiarity and control. Again, there is the mass wiping out of cultural landmarks - "The sense of place people have grown up with." Something that is all the more difficult to process while half the demolitions are still happening.

And then also the sense that events are still running us. "It's powerlessness. That is where a lot of the discomfort comes from. When you look at the world, we try to control everything. We try to predict the weather, we try to predict the outcome of the Rugby World Cup. So when we're reminded we actually control very little, it's a very disconcerting message."

Don Elder, Solid Energy chief executive and spokesman for the Christchurch Business Leaders' Group, is frank that his roughest time actually came after the first September quake. As the boss of a coal mining company, he was caught up in the Pike River tragedy as well.

"By Christmas, my tank was completely empty and had been for weeks. By my judgment at least, I was no longer thinking clearly, performing well in my job or functioning usefully to those around me."

Elder says he took his Christmas break overseas - something his family never does, but it removed him from the pressures.

"I spent the first few days being a miserable sod, but thinking through where I was and why. I worked out that I had allowed myself to become too personally involved and too determined to make everything work out for everyone around me.

"Yet many things plainly couldn't be fixed that easily, and the best thing I could do for myself and others was to slow down, do my own job well, and help to create a real, quality recovery for Christchurch, not just emotional quick fixes."

Elder felt he coped better with the February 22 earthquake as a result. He was mentally prepared for a marathon, aware he needed to measure his efforts and get his regular exercise and sleep.

Deon Swiggs, founder of the earthquake information clearing house RebuildChristchurch.co.nz, says he too made the mistake of throwing too much of himself into the early heroic stages of the recovery.

It cost him a relationship. And it set up an expectation of a pace that was impossible to sustain, especially with goalposts continuing to shift every time a goal is set.

"This has made the past few months a bit up and down at times," Swiggs confesses.

He says he is surprised how the weariness can accumulate, making it hard to stay motivated. One thing that helps is having not just breaks away, but many sociable mini events to look forward to. Dates marked in the diary for the weeks and months ahead.

"There is not too much to do in Christchurch at the moment, and looking forward to doing something always provides a glimmer of hope. Compiling a 'to do' list of basic things I want to achieve in the next 12 months is also helpful, as is having that list pinned above my mirror as a reminder of the things that need to be done."

Christchurch City Councillor Sue Wells says her recent months have felt remarkably like being the mother of a new born baby again. "Disrupted sleep, never really resting, always on edge. Mother's brain all over," she says.

The fatigue is palpable. "Completing sentences seems a lot harder than it used to. I find myself reaching for - um - words," Wells jokes. She too has been striving to build exercise and breaks back into her life. Making appointments for nice things to do every few weeks so there is something to look forward to.

Student Volunteer Army leader Sam Johnson says he has discovered how severely mental tiredness can drag on normal attempts to function.

"Strangely, it's the small things in life I find hard to make a decision about - like what to have for dinner. And studying for a law exam right now is the hardest thing I've done all year. It seems irrelevant to our situation in Christchurch and it requires hours of reading and memorising. It didn't use to be this difficult."

Christchurch Central MP Brendon Burns says the winter has definitely been tough for people and patience can wear thin.

"As an MP you absorb a lot of people's frustrations and heartbreak. I can cope with that, but something like a technology glitch causes me to vent at the screen."

Burns had a break to Samoa in August. And "dark chocolate mid afternoon with a good strong cuppa" helps. He says it also helps to tell yourself that looking back, this year's darker moments are going to fade. Instead, what we are going to remember is how much was learnt and achieved.

Waimakariri District Council Mayor David Ayers agrees.

"As a former history teacher, I know that what seems important now may seem trivial looking back in a few year's time - and the reverse can be the case too."

From what people are saying, disillusionment is probably too strong a word for the current psychological stage, although maybe that is still ahead if what Cantabrians are really coping with at the moment is uncertainty and biding time. As decisions, or their consequences, start to become more definite, discontent can also begin to take on a definite focus.

Glavovic, with the advantage of being on the outside looking in, thinks it likely many are looking for a proper breather. They have hit the wall, or are just doing so. The rugby and the election are welcomed diversions, but then there is also the usual mad scramble of getting things done in the run-up to Christmas.

"People will get to the end of the year exhausted. I don't see how anyone can avoid that. Whether we are talking about the community board chairs, the recovery managers, the staff on the front line, the chief executives and mayors, all will be worn out and run down and need that Christmas break."

Glavovic believes then that the summer holidays will see a changing of the gears. Pausing from the recovery might seem bad, but it will also help create perspective. He says people should start 2012 as a new year, ready to roll up their sleeves and begin afresh, and better informed about the pace that things can actually happen.

- The Press

Comments