The Crossing: New $140m development in Christchurch

Wilson & Hill architects A fly-through video of the proposed new Christchurch development The Crossing.

Described as new heart for central Christchurch, a glossy $140 million precinct called The Crossing is the latest big development announced for the city.

The precinct will include shops, offices, cafes, bars and carparking around a network of laneways and airbridges.

Christchurch's wealthiest man, central city landlord Philip Carter, is behind the plan.

Supplied Iain McGregor Iain McGregor Iain McGregor An artist impression of The Crossing to be built by the Carter group in Central Christchurch on the corner of Cashel and Colombo streets as part of the rebuild from the 2011 earthquakes. The Carter group will soon start work on redeveloping The Crossing. The Carter group will soon start work on redeveloping The Crossing. The Carter group soon start work on redeveloping The Crossing. 1 of 4 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

Construction starts soon, and the precinct will occupy new and heritage buildings on over a hectare of land between Cashel, Colombo, Lichfield and High streets. It is due to open in October next year.

Carter promised the development would be "the cornerstone of a vibrant and world-class retail precinct that will be a draw card for locals and visitors alike".

The hospitality area would be open from daytime to evenings and feature a distinctive glass bubble facade.

"It will give the central city a new heart and pump life back into the retail precinct as a whole," he said.

Tenants have not been announced, but are likely to include fashion and food and beverage outlets.

Carter said tenant interest had been "very strong".

A leading possibility is British-based global fashion retailer Topshop, as Carter has taken a shareholding in the company's New Zealand arm.

Office floors will be at either end of the precinct, with hospitality in the middle. The precinct will link to Ballantynes via the existing airbridge to the west, and to The Crossing car park which Carter has bought from the Christchurch City Council to the south.

Carter has bought 80 per cent of the site since the earthquakes, expanding his smaller holding which was on the Cashel-Colombo corner, and retained The Crossing name.

He joins other City Mall landlords including Tim Glasson, Nick Hunt and Antony Gough in launching his development under special Christchurch Central Development Unit rules for the city's retail core.

Owners must put together master-planned developments with pedestrian links.

Carter said this requirement had made planning harder, but he was very pleased with the result.

"We've spent a lot of time making sure there was plenty of sun and light and shelter. And getting the car parking was key to making it work.

"It's all going to start happening around here now – this area is really changing quickly."

- The Press