The Campaigners: Fighting for Christchurch's homeowners

David Walker Homeowners' advocates are working tirelessly to provide information to hundreds of Cantabrians still seeking answers on post-quake issues five years on.

Collective anger is brewing in post-quake Canterbury. There's been class action lawsuits, petitions for a royal inquiry and a successful effort to extend the consultation on coastal hazards. CECILE MEIER talks to four homeowners' advocates who have worked tirelessly on these issues.



It started with sleepless nights, overwhelming anger or a feeling of helplessness.



Then came a realisation that hundreds, maybe thousands, of people shared similar problems: shoddy quake repairs, feeling bullied by insurers and the Earthquake Commission, repeated floodings, and more recently, facing the implications of coastal hazard zoning on their properties.



Something had to be done.



Few Cantabrians like making a fuss about their problems – there's always someone worse off and being too vocal could put you at the back of the queue.



But for a handful of residents, the negative feelings had to be channelled into action.



It was not just about their own claim anymore.



Too many people were isolated, uninformed, powerless.



Leanne Curtis, Hugo Kristinsson, Warwick Schaffer, Sarah Miles, Cam Preston, Melanie Tobeck-Bourke, Jo Byrne, Brent Cairns and Mark Munro have all become familiar names for quake-hit and flood-hit residents and coastal property owners.



They have organised meetings, relentlessly shared information on blogs and social media, and called for collective action.



They have been in the newspaper, on television, on the radio.



Their action, often with the help of experts donating their time, has spurred court cases against EQC and Southern Response, and this week a petition asking for a royal commission inquiry into shoddy quake repairs. One of them helped win a time extension for consultation on coastal hazards zoning.



They don't all have the same approach.



Some, including Canterbury Communities' Earthquake Recovery Network (Cancern)'s spokeswoman Leanne Curtis and Flockton Residents spokeswoman Jo Byrne, work closely with authorities and insurers to bridge the gaps.



Others, including staunch insurance critics Cam Preston and Sarah Miles have completely lost trust in authorities and insurers and campaign against them.

No matter their approach, they are all genuinely trying to effect systemic change so the mistakes don't get repeated in the next disaster.

FIGHTING AGAINST SHODDY REPAIRS

Melanie Tobeck-Bourke addressing a public meeting on earthquake repair issues this week.

In 2013, Melanie Tobeck-Bourke was besides herself.



Her West Melton home had been one of the first to be repaired after the September 2010 quake, but the work was shoddy.



"It was a failed repair and they [Southern Response] wouldn't listen. We were accused of lying.



"I couldn't sleep, I couldn't eat. I didn't know what to do."



She decided to go to a Southern No Response protest. She had never done such a thing before.



"I was really fearful going to that protest. 'Everyone will think I'm a nutter.' I thought."



Meeting other people in similar situations catalysed the proactive role she took afterwards.



"I saw a lot of people were absolutely distraught and had nowhere to go."



She joined the group, started to organise meetings and even created her own support group, Claimants4Claimants.



This week, she helped launch a petition asking parliament for a royal commission of inquiry into shoddy repairs at a public meeting for homeowners.



"There's that fear that if they speak out, they will be put at the back of the queue.



"It's about getting people confident that we're hopefully still in a democratic society and it's OK."



Every meeting she organises is "a massive undertaking".



Her IT and communication skills went into weeks of preparation, getting experts on board and promoting the event.



She started this work just as she exited her own business in 2013, She had the time.



It paid off the first time – 300 people turned up. More keep turning up to the meetings.

Tobeck-Bourke says her actions are neither "a vendetta to get anyone", nor political.

FIGHTING FOR CHANGE IN THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY

Sarah Miles at her damaged house at West Melton. She just settled with her insurer after five years.

Former investment banker and psychotherapist Sarah Miles was battling a different insurer – IAG – but had a similar wake up call in 2011.



"I was waking up at 3am, worried about my claim."



She put her energy into researching and writing a book : The Christchurch Fiasco and the Insurance Aftershock.



"That's how I got through this difficult period."



The book was published in 2012 and it led to a popular blog on the topic.



Her European background and 10 years as an investment banking lawyer in Amsterdam and London helped. She overcame the fear of speaking out.



"If this was happening in Europe, people wouldn't be still sitting there five years on waiting for their claim to be resolved.



"Here you're seen as brave if you speak up, which I think is really sad. It's part of being an active citizen.



"Until we start working together, nothing's going to change."



She finally settled her claim a week ago and is nervous about how this is going to be perceived in the community.



"They might not understand why I continue to battle because most people when they settle, they just disappear.



"But for me it's about social justice."



Miles wants to see legislation protecting policy holders and regulatory change in the insurance industry.



The only way to achieve this, she believes, is pulling people together.



"I don't wake up in the morning and think: 'Those bastards, I'm going to get them'".



But neither does she believe in engaging with authorities.



"Government and the insurance industry are not interested in bridging the gap with homeowners. It's about economics for them."



She tried to engage at the beginning but says this was met only by arrogance.

"I've become quite cynical."

FIGHTING FOR FLOOD-HIT RESIDENTS

Jo Byrne outside the Carrick St home she had to abandon after it was repeatedly flooded.

When her quake-damaged house flooded for the first time in June 2013, Flockton Basin's Jo Byrne decided to take action.



"I realised nobody was going to help us. We had to help ourselves."



She, her husband and two young children had to move out of their home with for eight weeks.



She contacted Christchurch City Council and EQC about the flooding issue affecting half her neighbourhood but "nobody responded".



She wrote a letter to The Press and a reporter visited.



From there Byrne became a spokesperson for about 200 Flockton residents and organised meetings.



"Our furniture was in storage and we had no carpet but I started meetings in our house."



A few months later, the March 2014 floods hit.



"I was so anxious I went to counselling for the first time."



She kept lobbying council and government for a fix.



She worked hard to get national media exposure.



"I didn't want to be in the bloody news but somebody had to."



She kept engaging with quake authorities and council.



"You can't fight things from the outside. You need to have a relationship with people from those organisations."



Last year, with the help of lawyer Duncan Webb, the Flockton group asked the High Court to clarify EQC's approach on land claims impacting thousands of residents.



"We were so lucky Duncan Webb offered to do High Court for us at a pittance and we were able to fundraise.



"Our collective power affected the outcome of the declaratory judgement, not as much as we would have wanted, but it gave us a better outcome."



An "enormous quantity of work" was involved, keeping everyone informed and organising meetings.



She couldn't have done it without her family's support and help. "Someone has to look after children when I have to go to meetings at strange hours".



Byrne moved into a new home in June 2014, while her Carrick St house "is still sitting there, decaying".



She is slowly working towards a cash settlement with Southern Response.



Her new home's joints crack when it gets cold – "typical Christchurch" she jokes.



But "to live somewhere safe – it doesn't have to be lovely or anything" helps.



"I'm a totally different person than I was 12 months ago".



Since last year's High Court ruling on EQC's land claims, it has become quieter for Byrne, but she still lobbies authorities for flood-hit residents.

She has also become a community board member for Shirley Papanui.

FIGHTING FOR COASTAL PROPERTY OWNERS

Christchurch Coastal Residents United spokesman Mark Munro says he is fighting for fairness.

For property investor Mark Munro, it all started with a July article in The Press about the council's proposed new coastal hazard zoning.

The proposed rules could affect the value of thousands of properties potentially vulnerable to erosion and coastal flooding.

They would also limit new development in high risk areas.

Munro owns commercial property in New Brighton and felt there was more to the issue.

He met with people interviewed in the article, researched reports on climate change and contacted experts to ask questions.

He felt it was unfair from the council to push the new rules, a "bureaucratic earthquake", as he calls it.

"I certainly experienced the anger. We've got to have some passion about it."

Council had to fast-track the consultation process under special quake legislation and homeowners got limited rights to challenge the rules in court.

"I was alarmed at the draconian process.

"We understand the policy on coastal hazards needs to happen but we've been treated differently from the rest of the country."

People in other regions can challenge coastal hazards decisions in court, he says, but "because council is shoving it under earthquake legislation we've got no right of appeal".

He formed the Christchurch Coastal Residents United (CCRU) group with Southshore resident Tim Sintes and became its spokesman.

"Someone had to do it," he says.

It's not just about his property.

Since the September quakes, he has been feeling "incredibly guilty" his Halswell home only suffered minor damage while people in the east struggled.

"I remember driving to New Brighton after the September quakes. I was crying on the way back.

"Seeing what people have gone through over the past five years ... Many are still struggling physically and emotionally."

The CCRU group quickly gathered support, with experts coming on board to help and hundreds of homeowners joining.

Last week, they pressured council into requesting a 30 working day extension to the submission period on the proposed new rules.

Now they want the council to stop the process and start again on the same basis as the rest of the country.

Some councillors have already changed their minds, Munro says.

"I'm like a dog with a bone. I won't stop until I win."

MELANIE TOBECK-BOURKE

Her fight: Shoddy repairs.

Background: Business consultant.

Actions: Part of the protest group Southern No Response, founder of Claimants4Claimants, organises regular meetings where homeowners get free information from legal and technical experts.

Personal situation: Her West Melton home was one of the first to be repaired following the September 2010 quake, but the repairs were shoddy and the job will have to be redone at twice the price. She has been fighting her insurer Southern Response for a fair settlement and hopes to reach resolution soon. Married with two children.

SARAH MILES

Her fight: Change and regulation in the insurance industry.

Background: Former investment banking lawyer and psychotherapist.

Actions: Wrote a book on how the private insurance industry has failed Christchurch after the quakes: The Christchurch Fiasco and the Insurance Aftershock. Updates a popular blog on the topic regularly: thechristchurchfiasco.wordpress.com.

Personal situation: Her West Melton home was extensively damaged in the September 2010 quake and it took her insurer IAG five years to resolve her claim. Married to a supportive husband.

JO BYRNE

Her fight: Flooding and EQC land claims.

Background: Speech therapist with good organisational and communication skills.

Actions: Drew media interest to Flockton Basin residents' plight after they were repeatedly flooded in the past two years. Led a group of homeowners who took court action against EQC on land claims. Became a community board member for the Shirley Papanui board.

Personal situation: The Byrnes had to abandon their Carrick St home in 2014 after it was repeatedly flooded. They had lived in the house for 10 years and never experienced flooding before the February 2011 quake. Married with two small children, works part time.

MARK MUNRO

His fight: Fairness for coastal property owners.

Background: Property investor.

Actions: Spokesman for the recently formed group Christchurch Coastal Residents United (CCRU), got experts on board to help and grew CCRU's members to hundreds of homeowners in a few weeks. The group pressured the council into requesting an extension for the submission period on coastal hazards zoning decisions.

Personal situation: Owns commercial property in New Brighton and lives between Halswell and Tai Tapu. Married with three teenagers.

- Stuff