Thousands call for insurance advice MARC GREENHILL

Cantabrians frustrated by earthquake insurance claims have contacted a Government-run advisory service more than 3500 times in 10 months.

Latest figures from the Residential Advisory Service (RAS) show 3538 "contacts" from insurance and Earthquake Commission (EQC) customers since the service, led by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority, opened in May last year.

Of those, 741 cases had been passed to independent advisers, provided by Community Law Canterbury, 446 inquiries were referred to other agencies and 392 had been closed.

The average time taken to close a case was 81 days.

The top three concerns raised were related to the scope of works, repair strategies and cash settlements. Foundations, delays and repairs versus rebuilds also featured prominently.

RAS chairwoman Michelle Mitchell said not all the calls were complaints.

"Sometimes [customers] don't know what the right thing to do is and they're making decisions on their own and may not have a lot of support," she said.

Feedback from exit surveys suggested 86 per cent of customers were satisfied with the service and that 88 per cent would refer others to the service.

The resolution timeframes "could always be better" but some cases were complex and required information from multiple sources, Mitchell said.

Of those surveyed, 76 per cent of customers said the timeframe met their needs.

"That doesn't seem to be an issue for the residents who are working their way through the process," Mitchell said.

Richmond homeowner Jacki Morris said she used the RAS last year to help resolve a dispute with the EQC over land damage, but felt it "had no teeth".

RAS had set up two meetings with EQC and her insurer, and supplied legal representation, but no resolution could be reached after several weeks.

"There's no point in even having a service if they cannot make somebody come to the party. If there's no accountability and RAS have absolutely no teeth . . . I guess that's where it falls down," she said.

Canterbury Communities' Earthquake Recovery Network spokesman Brian Parker said most people who had used the service found it effective, but it needed greater promotion.

"It's one thing to put the word out to the general populace but it's another to get it to the people who actually really need it," he said.

A community-driven website called In the Know was set up last week as a one-stop shop for quake rebuild information.

Parker's other criticism of RAS was that those who had formally complained to EQC could not use the service.

Mitchell said those terms were decided by EQC when the service was set up.

"We are continuing and will continue to have discussions with EQC in respect of that approach because we do think the service can also help people [in the EQC complaints process] because of the independent advice component of it," she said.

EQC customer services general manager Bruce Emson said it supported the service as a founding partner, but preferred to use its own independent mediation service to avoid "duplication".

Its mediation service had resolved more than 30 claims in the past year and had 12 claims in progress, he said.

- The Press

Comments