Thousands stuck in post-quake insurance hell Thousands stuck in insurance hell JOHN MCCRONE

At least 3000 home-owners are still stuck in post-quake insurance hell. What is being done to unblock the final logjams? JOHN MCCRONE reports.

It is very odd. Not one but a pair of deaf signers are taking it in turns to stand up front by the projection screen and translate the geotechnical engineer's words.

Tuesday evening in St Albans. The Earthquake Commission (EQC) has laid on a public briefing on how its insurance cover applies to land damage, especially the new categories of increased flooding vulnerability (IFV) and increased liquefaction vulnerability (ILV).

It is a thinly attended meeting anyway. And of the 30 people in the hall, a fair proportion are EQC staff and other recovery agency representatives.

Quite a few more are the familiar faces who now turn up at every public insurance event, the mal-contents clutching their files and bristling for a fight.

That leaves barely a dozen of the genuinely bemused - ordinary folk stuck in insurance limbo and seeking answers.

What percentage of this small group was likely to be deaf and in need of a translation service you have to wonder?

Still, it is fascinating to see jargon such as lateral spreading, ground water and declaratory judgement being expressed as hand signs. And perhaps it suggests a big effort to communicate with claimants is being made rather late in the day.

Yep, we do need to give the insurers more credit, Leanne Curtis, relationship manager for the Canterbury Communities' Earthquake Recovery Network (Cancern), says as the chairs are being tidied away at the end of the talk.

After four years of muddle and anguish, they are finally getting their act together.

Cancern was formed as much because of their early failures, the simple fact that the number of claims, the complexity of the claims, overwhelmed them.

But Curtis says now that we are getting down to the tail-end of the recovery, the remaining cases - the stuck cases - can get the insurers' full attention.

"Before they were just dealing with numbers, this sea of people. Now they are dealing with individual files that have a name. They're saying we can see you as people."

By definition, says Curtis, those still stuck after all this time - either awaiting a clear offer or disputing what has been offered - are the ones in serious hell.

For them, the earthquakes were nothing. Insurance is what has been breaking their health, their relationships, their sanity.

How many are there? Curtis thinks it is definitely 3000 home-owners. It feels as if it could be as many as 6000.

Yet also she says, if people are finding themselves stuck, it tends to be because of some generally shared snag or complication.

They break into groups being held back by a particular issue. So the insurers are now able to zero in, target each category of stuck-ness with a process designed to unlock the claims.

Curtis says this small evening meeting was an example of that. A lot of effort going in to resolve the remaining few.

"The insurers are desperate to move on too. Before they were applying policies, but now the numbers are small enough that they can look at things flexibly. The opportunities are different."

Southern Response (SR) chief executive Peter Rose has his management team assembled in the project office, a bunker circled with planning lists and progress charts.

SR is the government company formed to take over the $2.2 billion insurance liability of a collapsing AMI. Responsible for a third of all over-cap claims - those beyond the first $100,000 of damage covered by EQC - SR offers a good snapshot of where Canterbury's residential recovery is at.

Operations manager Darrell Hansen is on his feet, pointing at poster-sized print-outs of names colour-coded green, yellow and red. Yes we are dealing with individual files now, not a faceless flood of cases, he says.

Hansen says each list shows where people have got to in a step of the settlement process. So at a glance you can see which claims are red-flagged, stuck for some reason, and pull them out for special attention.

Rose then turns attention to a graph of SR's overall progress. The significant number is that 90 per cent of all claims have been resolved, he says.

A large chunk of those are people whose suburbs were red-zoned of course. Most took a cash payout to buy a new home. Then for those who are repairs or rebuilds, the work has either been complete or is now in the pipeline.

Rose turns to another chart forecasting SR's construction activity. You can see that 2015 and 2016 are when most of it is going to happen, he says.

The curve jumps skyward after the coming Christmas holidays. The rate of building is about to double. So for those in the rebuild queue, they are safely on their way.

The stuck are the 10 per cent or so - the rump of about 800 of SR's 7200 claims - who have either not agreed a decision or else not even yet been made an offer. This is where the traumas and the disputes lie.

Rose says if you extrapolate SR's figures to include the other insurers and EQC, you do get up to Curtis's number of 3000 home-owners at least. A reason why insurers are still getting slammed for inaction, for running a policy of "delay, deny, defend".

But OK, Rose says, let's break that down. What are the reasons why certain groups of people are getting stalled on settlement? And what are the insurers doing to unblock these logjams?

* Retaining walls

This has emerged as a really thorny one, Rose says.

In the Port Hills, there are hundreds of homes where repairs and rebuilds are being held up because the walls holding the hillsides together must be fixed first.

"The building platforms have to be secure before consents can be issued and the work can get started." But Rose says often it is uncertain who even owns the retaining walls let alone who is going to pay for their fixing. Some belong to the council. Others were built so long ago that their ownership - whose side of a boundary they might stand - is unclear.

And each wall of course affects both the property above and the one below. "So you could well be waiting on a neighbour to fix theirs." Then there is the question of who pays. Rose says many AMI policy holders did not realise that retaining walls were one thing their insurance excluded. And then the EQC is interpreting its own policy as covering only the indemnity value of a wall, not its full replacement cost. Once depreciation for age is added to a 50-or-60-year-old wall, a homeowner might get a cheque of $5000 to pay for $80,000 of damage.

So there could be 300 or 400 hillside claims on hold as owners work out what to do about a cash shortfall, Rose says. There has been talk of a class action law suit to lever more money out of EQC, but that could take a year or two.

Meanwhile, Rose says efforts are being made to help where possible. The council is assembling a database of who owns what so at least there is the information to make decisions.

The banks are letting retaining wall repairs be added to mortgages. The insurers are allowing people to take money off the rebuild of a house, downsize a bit, so the cash can go into propping up their sections.

For the owners, it is an incredibly unhappy and stressful situation, Rose says. Yet the blame for the settlement delays, the reasons for being stuck, are not really due to insurers dragging their feet.

* Multi-units and cross-leases





This is another tale of tangled responsibilities, Emma Williams, SR's shared property claims manager, says.

Williams says pre-quake, only about 10 per cent of apartment buildings or multi-unit complexes were run by a body corporate and so used a single insurer. The result is that a collection of different insurers are usually involved in sorting any claim.

And even where there is a body corporate, owners have to agree to a common plan. Yet people inevitably have different ideas. It can quickly become neighbours holding each other up.

"You'll get situations where there are five units all attached and there's one in the middle that's been cash settled. The owner's opting for demolition and not reinstating."

Williams says there are examples of flat owners taking off to Queensland with their cheques and demanding the rest of the block buys out their property title for an exorbitant price if they want to start rebuilding.

Again, says Williams, there is not much the insurers can do except patiently work through the claims. Although they have streamlined the settlement process as much as possible by agreeing that whichever company has the majority of the claims in a shared property now handles the entire negotiation.

* Leaky homes





Once more a story of owners caught in a complex decision.

SR's Hansen says he is dealing with more than 100 damaged houses with watertight issues.

"People will usually have been aware they had a problem at the back of their minds." And Hansen says indeed some leaky home owners will be feeling lucky that the earthquakes came along to force a full rebuild at the insurer's expense. "They are some of the real lotto winners if you like." However the difficulties arise when a house is a repair and the insurance covers only the cost of fixing new cladding cracks but not the home's underlying architectural faults.

Hansen says insurers can cash settle on the cracks and that can go towards the bill for a full leaky home fix by the owner. Yet if claimants are stuck, it is because they have some expensive choices about their next step.

* Flood vulnerability

Another broad class of the stuck are those waiting on the EQC's land damage decisions.

As EQC was striving to explain at its St Albans "Know Land" briefing, it is seeking legal clarification as to what its policy even covers in terms of land becoming more prone to flooding because it has sunk, or more prone to liquefaction because the water table has risen and the soil crust thinned.

Settlements have been on hold because it has taken several years to collect the geotechnical data with neighbourhood-wide drilling and repeated aerial surveys of ground levels.

Rose says there are likely to be knock- on effects if the council's proposed District Plan recognises many more homes to be in the official Flood Management Area. This could force insurers to redraft some of the repairs already in the rebuild pipeline.

Rose says there are similar uncertainties where individual properties are now subject to newly identified natural hazards such as soil contamination or the land-slip and rock- roll risks of the Port Hills.

Christchurch is now criss-crossed with different hazard markings on the city's planning maps which are complicating rebuild decisions. It is no one's fault, just a fact of life, Rose says.

* Human reasons for being stuck

SR customer support manager John McSweeney says the vulnerable make another large chunk of those whose claims are not progressing.

SR has identified some 450 on its case files, he says, of which 150 are in such difficulty that this year SR created a dedicated 10-strong team to give them "end to end" support.

"It's a wide category - the elderly, those with health issues, but also those whom the process has just caused them stress. They're struggling to make decisions for whatever their own individual reason is." McSweeney says at first SR expected the vulnerable merely to require a nudge in the right direction. So the initial policy was to pick them out of the pack and hurry them to the front of the claims queue.

However it instead became apparent that these were customers who needed to be allowed to move at their own pace, but with constant support.

"Many are in their late 80s or even into their 90s. They should really be in retirement homes. We're basically holding their hands every step of the way."

* Relationship breakdown

Another category of stuckness SR has been forced to recognise is simple relationship breakdown - where claimants have become so upset by the insurance process they can no longer engage with insurers.

SR is partnering with Cancern to trial a new service called Breakthrough. Cancern's Curtis says it is going to be similar to marriage guidance.

Some people are so angry they cannot even hear when the insurers are now agreeing to what they want, she says.

"Sometimes nothing is going to progress until they feel they've had an apology." And she is coming across people who seem determined to be the very last ones settled. "A victim mentality has developed." So Breakthrough will be an attempt to help such claimants to begin talking to their insurer again.

* Legal dispute

Then Rose says a further large class of stuck cases are those trapped in legal dispute. He says 189 High Court cases have been filed by lawyer Grant Shand, working with earthquake advocate Bryan Staples, alone. While SR's lawyers can't talk to the claimants, Rose says SR's own staff are determined to contact those involved in court proceedings to seek another way of resolving their differences.

"People have been given unrealistic expectations of what they might receive," Rose says. Most also do not realise how long legal action is likely to take.

One lady came out of her first case conference in tears the other week after the judge warned her that the court list is so lengthy it could take five years for her claim to be settled.

Rose says he believes many are caught up in a course of action that doesn't suit their own best interests so SR has a duty to offer alternatives if it can.

So that is the picture, Rose says. The recovery has got to the point where the bulk of the insurance claims have been negotiated and the unsettled claims all have some common issue.

As an organisation, Rose says SR was shocked by the angry street protests of last December. It came back this year determined to reorganise its internal processes to unlock those still stuck.

The project office with its wall charts was one of the innovations. SR also formed a solutions team, a roving group of experts with the authority to step in and troubleshoot a claim that had turned red on the board.

Rose says often a claim gets stuck because of some single detail, such as a dispute over whether a front door step requires replacing.

Another that sticks in his mind was where there were mature trees near a home and the owner did not want the roots damaged. A different foundation repair method had to be agreed.

Before, such requests would have gone round and round in a circle of emails. Now the system makes the individual files immediately visible and claims can be kept moving.

Another such measure is a weekly claims clinic, an open house session that SR runs for its contractors. Again the focus is on files encountering some hitch. Builders can get on the spot answers from SR's panel of experts.

Insurance Council of New Zealand (ICNZ) chief executive Tim Grafton says it is all about how the performance of the insurers should be judged.

There have been the howls of complaint for so long that it is easy to think the insurers are intent on dodging their responsibilities.

But the truth is that the Canterbury earthquakes threw up insurance complexities that simply have not been seen elsewhere.

Grafton says $8b in commercial building claims and $5b in residential housing claims have now been settled.

So a great many people are quietly relieved if nothing else.

And while about 10 per cent of claims remain stuck, every effort is being made now that each particular situation can be fully appreciated.

It is also clear that it is usually some unfortunate combination of circumstances that are causing individual delays. Cancern's Curtis is not so quick to give the insurers a pass mark.

Like many, mention of EQC still produces head shaking. Another class of stuck claims has been the cases that EQC decided were going to be under-cap and have only slowly been turned over to the insurers.

Some 600 files came through like this in just the last quarter and no one is sure how many more EQC may have hidden up its sleeve.

Curtis says 3000 to 6000 stuck claimants is also still an awful lot of people, an awful lot of pain. That should not be forgotten.

But the positive note is that the categories of hold-up are coming into sharp focus, the numbers of claimants are dwindling to the point where insurers can view the cases individually.

The final clean-up is going to go on for years. Yet Curtis says at least the insurance saga has reached another stage of its story.

- The Press

Comments