READER REPORT: Three years on: A man-made disaster DALE OGILVIE

David Hallett EASTERN CHRISTCHURCH: Some areas were zoned green while surrounding neighbours were red-zoned.

On 4 September 2010, a terrifying magnitude 7.1 earthquake shook Cantabrians out of their beds at 4.35am. Three years on, Dale Ogilvie is still living in his condemned home while building a new one. He says EQC should never be allowed to manage a recovery again.



Currently we are self-managing the building of a new house out west.

We are still living in our condemned (but comfortable) home in South Brighton and had to take out another mortgage to purchase our section out west.

While the quakes were bad, the EQC, government and insurance response has been far worse.

I pity anyone else who has to live through a similar event, unless changes are made.

EQC needs to have money on hand, not invested in NZ Government bonds.

Insurers must materially settle claims within six months of the event, not by six years later, as would be our fate if we had not cash settled with Southern Response.

EQC should never be allowed to manage a recovery again. Instead, insurers should manage it with EQC paying out as required.

Our experience of Cera (Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority) land zoning shows the process to be slow and arbitrary.

Our home was one of only five in our sector of the last orange zone to be green zoned. We still have no clue what scientifically differentiates our property from all the other properties which were finally zoned red after months of Cera delay.

We did ask, but one thing that is common through this experience is the vacuous form letter.

I think the degree of incompetence shown by EQC is truly stunning. It is best shown by a Campbell Live episode not long ago where they showed a vast paper trail of emails from Cantabrians livid at EQC. Emails sent that very evening.

On the other hand, which is more stunning: EQC's incompetence or Gerry Brownlee's insistence they are doing a good job?

Highlights get drowned out by the main line of anger, but I would call the original Department of Building and Housing guideline document a stellar example of someone trying to set some useful and practical ground rules for repair.

We were encouraged by various grants from Red Cross, some helpful Army chaps who helped remove our dangerous chimney, and John Campbell for shining a light on individual situations.

There were many people in the highlights. Highlights in one long government managed lowlight.

- The Press

Comments