Three years since earthquake reminder On June 13, 2011, Chch was rattled again GEORGINA STYLIANOU

DON SCOTT JUNE 2011 QUAKE: On June 13, 2011 - nine months after serious seismic activity started and four months after the devastating February 22 earthquake - Christchurch was once again brought to its knees.

What would you fix first in Christchurch? Share your stories, photos and videos. Share your stories, photos and videos. Relevant offers

Three years ago today, earthquake-rattled Christchurch residents were given a terrifying reminder of what happens when the ground beneath the city rumbles.

On Monday, June 13, 2011 - nine months after serious seismic activity started and four months after the devastating February 22 earthquake - Christchurch was once again brought to its knees.

Two powerful earthquakes cut power to thousands of homes, damaged hundreds of buildings and injured about 45 people.

A magnitude-5.9 quake hit one minute after 1pm and a shallow magnitude 6.4 struck at 2.20pm.

The quakes, both centred southeast of the city centre, caused part collapses of cliffs in the eastern bays, including a Sumner collapse which took part of an empty house with it.

The back-to-back shocks also caused severe liquefaction in many eastern suburbs, bringing weary residents back to square one.

Six people were hit by falling debris, about 10 were treated for chest pains and heart conditions while another two people suffered serious injuries.

More masonry fell from the landmark Christ Church Cathedral and the rose window, which survived the February 2011 quake, was destroyed.

The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) had to reinspect every central city building and, a couple of months later, a further 97 buildings were added to the demolition list as a result of the June 13 aftershocks. The tower of Lyttelton's historical Timeball Station was thrown 15 metres downhill and the Arts Centre suffered further damage.

Sirens were sounding throughout the CBD red zone and helicopters were flying above the city.

June 13 also marked Cera chief executive Roger Sutton's first day in the job.

Sutton helped calm people down outside the Christchurch Art Gallery, which was operating as the Civil Defence headquarters.

Former Christchurch mayor Sir Bob Parker described the day as "hellish", while Prime Minister John Key assured Cantabrians the Government and the nation stood behind them.

Emergency services responded to countless callouts to burst pipes and property damage while evacuations took place at several schools and public places around the city.

The first quake struck during the lunch break of an inquest into the deaths of 106 people killed in Christchurch's CTV building. Only five minutes into the inquest's afternoon session, the 6.4 aftershock hit, sparking another evacuation.

One family member said the shocks were "terrible reminders".

Residents in eastern Christchurch spent days shovelling liquefaction from their properties and strong aftershocks continued for weeks. Ten days later, the Government announced it would buy 5100 of the worst-affected insured properties. It also announced the first zoning decisions where properties were tagged green, red, orange and white.

- The Press

Comments