Top cop Dave Cliff gets Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority job

David Walker/Fairfax NZ Former Canterbury district police commander Dave Cliff at Cera's offices in Christchurch, where he has been seconded to lead the authority's final phase.

A "well-respected" top police officer will lead a team charged with overseeeing the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority's final phase.

Former Canterbury district commander Dave Cliff, who became the face of policing after the Canterbury earthquakes, started his new role last month as head of Cera's change management office.

Community leaders have welcomed the move and say Cliff will bring empathy to the job.



He will lead a team of 12 people who will be recruited internally to oversee Cera's transition as it winds down in April next year.



Cliff said coming back to Christchurch from Wellington to work at Cera was "an extremely steep learning curve".



"It's a complete change of focus for me, having been involved in policing for the last 30 odd years.



"I'm still getting up to speed," he said.

stuff.co.nz Police superintendant Dave Cliff updates media on the situation in the aftermath of the February 2011 quake in Christchurch.

The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, which absorbed Cera earlier this year, approached Cliff for the role.

"I'm being lent to Cera," he joked.

He saw the job as a "co-ordination role", making sure the transition from Cera to other agencies went smoothly.

He had developed "strong relationships" with partner agencies through several years experience in senior positions in Canterbury.

"The skills around leadership and coordination and looking after people from police to Cera do translate.

"Same things required really, just the business is slightly different - law enforcement versus regeneration and rebuilding a city after an earthquake."

Cliff left Christchurch in October 2012 when his role as assistant commissioner for the South Island was realigned as assistant commissioner of road policing in Wellington.

"Having seen the devastation, having dealt with the families of those who lost people and being involved in the emergency response through the quakes, coming back and seeing how much progress has been made is quite startling," he said.

He remembered walking through Cashel Mall and Colombo St on February 22, 2011.

"The scale of it, the enormity, the fact that we didn't know at that point exactly how many people were trapped or had been killed.

"You keep having to pinch yourself over the fact that was real as opposed to a scenario we trained for but never thought would really happen."

In 2012, "it was time to move", he said.

"For us, probably like everybody else [the aftermath of the quakes] was a demanding period".

It was a good time to be back though, he said.

"I remember coming back to Christchurch a couple of years ago in the middle of winter and the place looked quite forlorn. Then I've come back this winter and you see much more development and I think there's a positive vibe."

Canterbury Communities' Earthquake Recovery Network spokeswoman Leanne Curtis said Cliff came across as trustworthy and empathetic in the weeks after the February 2011 quake.

"He really understood people incredibly well. He cared a lot, he took a lot into consideration.

"He gave a sense that he was the right guy for the job."

Curtis said his people skills would be good to lead Cera's transition.

Labour earthquake recovery spokeswoman Ruth Dyson agreed he was a good choice for the job.

"[Cliff] is very well respected and he earned that respect," she said.

"This could be one bit of good news from Cera."

- Stuff