Tower Insurance rebuild programme 'at full capacity'

Tower Insurance appears to be cash-settling remaining earthquake claims customers after its rebuild programme has reached "full capacity".

Christchurch resident Geoff Marks said he was disappointed to receive an email from Tower last week that read:

"Unfortunately, due to the closure of Tower's repair/rebuild programme, we can no longer offer clients the option of a managed solution. Please be aware that you claim will be settled with a cash payment, under the terms of your Provider Maxi House Policy."

Tower said its approach to resolving Canterbury claims "remains unchanged".

The Earthquake Commission (EQC) recently deemed Marks' claim over cap (damage valued at more than $100,000).

Marks said his insurer had given him the impression he would have the option of a managed repair.

An assessment of the house was made in March but a few weeks later Marks received the email informing him he would be cash-settled after all.

"You don't get shocked anymore with EQC and insurers. You just take the kick and carry on."

Marks said he would take Tower to court "if they don't offer me what I am entitled to".

A Tower spokeswoman said the insurer was "disappointed with the wording of the email" sent to Marks but denied the insurer had closed its managed repair programme.

"We continue to operate our managed rebuild and repair programme – we currently have just under 200 properties in construction, and plans for another 200 that will be completed on top of this. We are committed to delivering rebuilds and repairs for every customer who has asked to be part of our programme."

The rebuild and repair programme had reached "full capacity" so new over-cap referrals from EQC would likely be cash-settled, she said.

In some cases, settlement by a cash payment would be "the only option". For example, where customers had previous existing conditions such as weather-tight problems or unconsented works.

As of January 31, 2015, Tower had 860 over-cap claims left to settle. It has settled 1675 over-cap claims.

The spokeswoman said Tower had settled and closed 93 per cent of Canterbury quake claims.

Has Tower informed you you would be cash-settled when you wanted a managed repair? Email our reporter at cecile.meier@press.co.nz

- Stuff