Tower strengthens its Canterbury rebuild reinsurance cover

Lawrence Smith David Hancock, chief executive of Tower Insurance at the office in central Auckland.

Tower Limited has strengthened its reinsurance coverage relating to a "long tail" rebuild and repair period Christchurch is experiencing with the 2011 earthquakes.

Tower chief executive David Hancock said Tower had secured an additional $50 million in reinsurance cover for any adverse developments associated with the quake sequence.

The reinsurance would cover a seven year term and could potentially cover extra costs related to legal challenges.

He would not say how much the cover cost, but said it would not be material to Tower's earnings.

"This additional cover limits exposure and maintains financial flexibility should circumstances change," Hancock said. Tower would retain exposure to the first $30m in costs above the current reserves set aside to cover the cost of claims.

However, on the next $50m in costs Tower would bear only 12.5 per cent, or up to $6.25m, with the balance covered by reinsurance.

In 2014 Tower disclosed it has 1111 rebuilds and 1188 major repairs over the $100,000 cap, with many cash settlements taking place for that Canterbury work.

Over a period of time the costs of rebuilding and repairing homes had continued to increase, with disputes over whether a project was "undercap or overcap" adding to the timeframe. The longevity and complexity of some rebuilds was also adding to the cost.

The insurer had settled and closed 93 per cent, by volume, of all claims related to the Canterbury earthquake events, Hancock said.

The company did not add to that figure unless a claim was cash settled or a rebuild or repair was completed so homeowners could move back in.

Tower remained on track for "95 per cent plus" claims completion by the end of 2015. Hancock said it was hard to estimate how long the claims on the remaining tail of 5 per cent of properties would take to settle. "But this is a long tail event. This is a much longer tail than what everyone would have imagined."

So far there had not been any customers coming back to the insurer following final settlements on their claims. "We haven't seen that, technically we're dealing full and final settlement ... under New Zealand law there's always that risk, but we haven't seen that."

Some insurance peers had taken on increased provisioning.

"Despite Tower's industry leading claims resolution, risks continue in regard to increasing costs and time delays," the company said.

- Stuff