Town Hall tour by city councillors Structure has 'tilted towards the river' RACHEL YOUNG AND SARAH-JANE O'CONNOR

Daniel Tobin

Footage from inside the Town Hall taken with a GoPro camera worn by Cr Glenn Livingstone.

City councillors have been given a tour of the earthquake-damaged Christchurch Town Hall.

Councillors have committed $127.5 million towards saving the Town Hall, but have still to finalise the scope and design of the repairs.

After today's walk-through, Cr Tim Carter said there had not been a lot of damage to the superstructure, but there had been "significant lateral spread" and vertical displacement.

He said they would need to read the detailed engineering reports to understand whether the solutions to fix the foundations where cost-effective.

"The foundations are where the damage has occurred. The lateral spread, the fact that the whole structure, and you can see it from the outside, has tilted towards the river,'' he said.

"We need to understand from the engineering reports how they are going to fix that."

He said council needed to look at all the options in light of what those reports might contain. "I think the foundation details are going to be very crucial to the decision, along with the insurance."

Cr Yani Johanson said he preferred maximum retention and restoration of the Town Hall.

"The building is definitely in a better state than I expected ... It's not the disaster zone [Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee] made it out to be," he said.

On the cost of the refurbishment, Johanson believed the council had been through a public consultation that showed the community wanted the building saved.

Cr Glenn Livingstone also leant towards maximum restoration and retention.

However, he said councillors needed to have a debate about what was financially viable.

He described the walk-through as "pretty hard-hitting".

"From a gut, non-scientific reaction, it's reasonably good," he said.

Councillors need to decide on the scope and design by the end of this month as the Government is expecting advice by August 31 on what the council plans to do to fulfil the requirements in the Christchurch Central Recovery Plan for a performing arts precinct.

The size and the scope of the precinct will depend on what decision the council reaches on the Town Hall because if the repairs cost as much as estimated it will have only about $30m left to spend on additional facilities for the performing arts.

A report on the Town Hall will be presented at the council's community, recreation and culture committee on Friday.

A recommendation will be presented to the full council on August 29.

- The Press

Comments