US expert called in to help Catholic cathedral's restoration

SUPPLIED/Perception PR & Marketing Ltd US architect James McCrery answers the call to help restore Christchurch's Catholic cathedral.

Christchurch's Catholic leaders have flown in an American architecture specialist to help restore their earthquake-damaged city cathedral.

The Government gave the green light earlier this month for the diocese to go ahead with a $45-million revamp of the Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament on Barbadoes St.

The church must first investigate whether the nave - the central part of the building, which constitutes about 2/3 of its footprint – can be saved before going ahead with the plan.

IAIN MC GREGOR/FAIRFAX NZ IAIN MC GREGOR/FAIRFAX NZ IAIN MC GREGOR/FAIRFAX NZ IAIN MC GREGOR/FAIRFAX NZ IAIN MC GREGOR/FAIRFAX NZ IAIN MC GREGOR/FAIRFAX NZ Ecclesial architecture expert James McCrery views the quake-damaged Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament on Tuesday. A peek inside the quake-damaged Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament (through very dirty windows). American architect James McCrery says there will be a "huge amount of work" to restore the cathedral. A staircase inside the quake-damaged Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament. Pigeons live in the quake-damaged Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament. American architect James McCrery says the basilica is a "magnificient" building. 1 of 6 « Previous « Previous Next » Next »

If the nave cannot be saved, the cathedral will be demolished and a new one built on the site.

The diocese is calling on international expertise to make sure the restoration, if possible, is consistent with Catholic traditions.

American architect James McCrery arrived from Washington DC this week and saw the basilica for the first time on Tuesday.

"It's a gem of great classical architecture," he said.

"The world needs to know more about this grand building. It's absolutely magnificent.

"I can see a lot of damage through the broken windows, but I'm optimistic that there are portions of it that can be saved."

He said he was here to "foster a love and appreciation for tradition" and show local architects the building and other quake-damaged churches in the diocese could be repaired in a way reflecting the history of the church.

"Architects can't set that history aside," he said.

The restoration of the nave, if possible, would be a "huge amount of work".

He needed to look at the building more closely to say whether or not he believed it could be saved, he said.

"I don't know yet but I hope my answer is 'yes' because it's magnificent, I mean who wants to erase this?"

READ MORE:

* Video: Quake-damaged Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament

* Expert hails Catholic cathedral

* Catholicism's Canterbury spiritual home in doubt

Keith Beal, property and development manager for the diocese, said the diocese was bringing in international expertise because "we don't have the skills we feel we ought to have".

"James [McCrery] and his team believe that a Catholic church building needs to be a tangible and effective communication of Catholic faith."

McCrery would help with the cathedral's restoration, and with the many other quake-damaged churches across Canterbury and the West Coast.

Six catholic churches need to be rebuilt and 14 need repairs and strengthening.

"Some of them are pretty straight forward, others are more complex."

McCrery's firm, McCrery architects, has been commissioned to design many Catholic churches and Cathedrals across the United States.

The diocese would take him on site visits to damaged churches across Canterbury.



Catholic leaders announced the plans to demolish and rebuild parts of the cathedral in May and applied for a section 38 notice from the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) allowing for partial demolition in June.

It would take three to four years from the end of 2016 to complete the partial reconstruction, if possible.

Deconstruction would take place in 12 stages, with Cera's approval required at every step of the way, the diocese said.

Costs for the project are capped at $45 million. The diocese said it was seeking to fundraise $15m in support of the plan.

- Stuff