Video: Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel says sorry to the east

CHRISTCHURCH CITY COUNCIL/YouTube Christchurch mayor Lianne Dalziel makes an emotional apology to people in the east of the city who feel she has let them down

The Government needs to step up its act in Christchurch's eastern suburbs, not just the city council, Labour MP Poto Williams says.

Mayor Lianne Dalziel made an emotional apology on Saturday in response to hundreds of submissions from east Christchurch residents on the council's proposed 10-year budget, known as the draft Long Term Plan. The submissions expressed frustration at the slow pace of recovery and the lack of proposed spending in New Brighton and the eastern suburbs.

Williams, the MP for Christchurch East and Dalziel's successor in that role, said the responsibility did not sit solely with the council.

David Walker/Fairfax NZ Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel has apologised to the eastern suburbs for the pace of the recovery.

"We're talking about Government responsibility to the east as well. It's a two way street and and people out this way are feeling let down by both because there is so much to be done. There was so much that wasn't done prior to the earthquakes so we're starting from a very low base," Williams said.

"If we're not going to get our roads done because we've got to get through an infrastructure rebuild there are a few things they can do to help us out just to make it look nicer and tidier so we can feel proud about living out here."

The cleared red zone areas managed by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) looked "scruffy and messy", she said.

How I'd fix Christchurch's east Share your stories, photos and videos.

"Let's get those things done and we'll feel like somebody is actually taking care of us better," Williams said.

A Cera spokeswoman said it spent more than $4 million a year million on managing and maintaining the grassed areas in the red zone.

All red zone grassed areas were mown regularly, between every four or six weeks depending on weather and ground conditions.

The rolling programme was designed to ensure the grass remained at a tidy, managed level but it was not a public-use space so the condition of the grass was not meant to be in a park-like standard.

On Saturday, Dalziel's voice cracked with emotion as she apologised.

"On a personal level, I find this very difficult and I'm not going to cry. But to read the submissions and to read how much faith they put in me personally as their member of Parliament and to read that people feel that in electing me as their mayor that I would stand up for the east and to read how let down people feel in me," she said.

"All I really want to do is say that I am really sorry.

"There is no intention around this table to let anyone down and the wonderful thing that has come of this terrible process ... is that there isn't a member of this council that doesn't understand how important it is to prioritise work in the east."

Burwood/Pegasus community board chairwoman Andrea Cummings said the mayor's speech proved she had listened to concerns in the eastern suburbs.

"I think we did get a bum deal, Lianne admitted that ... and has promised to put it right. Good on her for doing that," she said.

"It was fantastic to hear our message had got across. We have been saying for a long time that we don't think we are being treated fairly."

She said more money should go to implementing the masterplan to regenerate New Brighton.

"The east needs more capital investment and more than just the business as usual that the long term plan provided."

Cr Glenn Livingstone said the proposed closure of South New Brighton Motor Camp and Rawhiti Golf Course was "the straw that broke the camel's back" for the eastern suburbs.

"We didn't help ourselves by doing that," he said.

"People had high expectations because Lianne came from the east. It was never her intention to let the east down. The east is never far from her thoughts."

Cr David East said he hoped more funding would be found for the New Brighton masterplan.

"The weight of submissions from the area has highlighted the need to do something positive for New Brighton."

East said Dalziel "has represented the area extremely well".

"I wouldn't use the phrase let down, but it is plainly obvious that successive councils have not done a huge amount in New Brighton. I am pretty confident that this time around we will be able to address that.

"I don't think it is her fault. It is a collective issue, but if you are the mayor, the buck stops there."

New Brighton Business and Landowners Association manager Paul Zaanen said New Brighton residents were frustrated at the slow recovery in the east, but it was not Dalziel's fault.

"It stems from a long period of frustration from even before the quakes. A lot of people want to see positive change," he said.

"The recovery in the east has not even started yet. People are frustrated. We are four years down the track and the planning has not even been finalised, never mind the implementation."

* Comments on this story are now closed.

- Stuff