Video: Quake-damaged Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament

PETE PERRIM/YouTube Pete Perrim has flown a drone over Christchurch's Catholic cathedral to document the damage done in the 2011 earthquake.

New aerial footage has revealed just how much damage was sustained by Christchurch's Catholic cathedral in the February 2011 earthquake.

Christchurch man Pete Perrim used a drone to film the Catholic Diocese of Christchurch's Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament from the air.

The footage, taken using a DJI Phantom 2 drone, documented the extent of the damage the Barbadoes St building experienced in the quake and its subsequent aftershocks.

Urbex Central Photographs taken inside the Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament by urban explorers show the damage post-quake.

Perrim uploaded the footage to YouTube on January 4, the same day it was taken, saying that "one of the most majestic and beautiful buildings in our city was turned into a pile of rubble by an 'act of God'".

Perrim said he had always thought the Catholic cathedral was "more majestic" than the Anglican's much-debated Christ Church Cathedral and it was a "real shame" that both were left lying in ruins.

"It's a magnificent building. Whether you're religious or not [it] was a beautiful building to be in."

The cathedral, pre-quake.

The drone footage showed how extensive the damage to the Catholic cathedral was though, and he did not believe it could be repaired.

"It's just amazing, total carnage."

Perrim said using drones was a hobby for him and he enjoyed being able to show people a perspective they might not have seen before.

RUINED: Drone footage shows the extent of the damaged caused by 2011's earthquakes.

The Catholic Diocese of Christchurch has requested a number of engineering and geotechnical reports on their damaged cathedral, which was also known as the Basilica.

Their most recent update said the cathedral's management board were still working through the reports.

They were also considering what Barbadoes St might look like in the future, what else was being developed in the area and how many people might live in the central city.

Board chairman Lance Ryan previously said the issues affecting the decision on what to do with the cathedral site were vast and complex.

"On the surface it may appear that we are becalmed, but there has been a tremendous amount of investigation and study being undertaken behind the scenes," he said.

"What we do know is that building capacity of the damaged cathedral as it now stands is in the range of 20 per cent to 30 per cent of the New Building Standard.

"This equates to it having over 10 times the risk of collapse compared with a new building during a period of normal seismic activity."

Rebuilding a full cathedral on the same site would require deep foundations, with piles going down 25 metres and ground improvement to 12 metres.

"The good thing is that we are all heading in the right direction, but it does take time," Ryan said.

It had been estimated that it would cost more than $100 million to restore the 1905 building and about $40m to build a new cathedral.

The diocese had already spent more than $3m cleaning, saving and numbering some parts of the cathedral that they hoped to reuse, including stones, windows and rare elements.

Panoramic images of the cathedral before the quake can be seen here and images taken inside the cathedral in August by Urbex, urban explorers who got a lot of attention for going into the Anglican cathedral late last year can be seen here.

- Stuff