Warning on cost of quake repairs LOIS CAIRNS AND GLENN CONWAY

DEAN KOZANIC/ Fairfax NZ FUNDING CONCERN: The rebuilding of the ring road continues on Anzac Drive between Pages Rd and Bridge St.

More money may have to be found to pay for repairs to Christchurch's quake-damaged roads and underground water and waste pipes - or less repair work done.

That is the stark prediction of KordaMentha, the firm hired to investigate the Christchurch City Council's finances and the fiscal implications of the Cost Sharing Agreement it signed with the Crown last year.

It has raised a red flag over the costs of the horizontal infrastructure rebuild and says if costs escalate beyond those budgeted - as the council expects - more money will need to be found or less work will have to be done.

That worries Labour's Christchurch transport spokeswoman Megan Woods, who says a shortfall could pose a "real threat" to the pace of the rebuild.

The council has budgeted $1.1 billion towards the cost of repairing Christchurch's earthquake damaged sewer, water and stormwater network.

The Government is meeting 60 per cent of the cost of rebuilding the underground pipes and 83 per cent of the cost of fixing the roads, but its contribution has been capped at a maximum of $1.8 billion.

Once that government money is exhausted, the council could have to shoulder any outstanding repair or rebuild work.

Latest figures show that 39 per cent of the wastewater pipes, 64 per cent of the water pipes, 52 per cent of the stormwater pipes, 26 per cent of the roads and 29 per cent of the bridges damaged in the earthquakes have been repaired so far, at a cost of $930 million.

Christchurch Mayor Lianne Dalziel told The Press there was scope within the Cost Sharing Agreement for some renegotiation of the horizontal infrastructure costs.

The agreement stipulated an independent assessor, agreed to by the council and the Crown, would review the horizontal infrastructure rebuild costs, taking into account additional information that would become available this year about the extent of the damage and the likely repair costs.

The assessor's report, which had to be provided by December 1, would provide a basis for any final discussions on horizontal infrastructure cost sharing.

"I'm hoping that date can be brought forward," Dalziel said.

Depending on the outcome of that review, the Crown's $1.8b contribution could be increased, reduced, or stay the same, the mayor said.

Woods said if the Crown's capped contribution of $1.8b was not enough "for the job that needs doing", the Government needed to discuss the issue.

Prime Minister John Key said he had yet to see anything that would suggest the money allocated to the horizontal rebuild would not be sufficient to cover work that needed to be done.

When asked whether the Government would be willing to increase its contribution if costs did balloon out, Key said: "I think we're pretty fully allocated to Christchurch at the moment so I don't think you would be wanting to increase that unless there was a really incredibly good case to do so."

Will Doughty, general manager of the Horizontal Infrastructure Rebuild Team, said the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt) and the funders were working together to keep costs as low as they possibly could.

- The Press

Comments