Westende House in Christchurch to be demolished

Kirk Hargreaves/Fairfax NZ Westende House on Manchester St has been cordoned off ready for demolition to start in the next two weeks.

Christchurch's Westende House will be demolished in two weeks.

The central city building was a symbol of the damage caused in the September 2010 earthquake, then it became a symbol of the Christchurch rebuild.

The original building on the corner of Manchester and Worcester streets partially collapsed in the September 2010 earthquake. It was one of the first city centre buildings to be rebuilt after the February earthquakes, reopening three years ago at a cost of cost $3.3 million.

Supplied pic Westende House was badly damaged in the September 2010 Canterbury earthquakes.

Demolition of the new building will start in the next two weeks to make way for a government plan to widen Manchester St by 9 metres.

A Christchurch Central Development Unit spokeswoman said the demolition would take about four weeks.

"Manchester St needs to be widened to ensure there is room for a main public transport route as well as better public space for greater numbers of pedestrians. The widened tree-lined boulevard will run beside the East Frame and will be a priority route for buses."

The building had tenants when the building was purchased by the Government. The tenants were evicted but the building was used for a period by Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority consultants.

KPI Rothschild Property Group co-director Shaun Stockman rebuilt and owned the building. He said it was frustrating to see the building demolished but he had moved on.

"We are victims of getting under way in the city centre too soon," he said.

"We have moved on now. A few people think it is a waste, but when we have a vibrant transport route there, we will think it was the right thing to do."

Stockman said they used the money from the sale of Westende House to buy Procope Cafe on Memorial Ave and a showroom on Ferry Rd.

"I have got better things to do with my life than wake up in the morning grinding my teeth because the Government have taken my building," he said.

- Stuff