What Napier can teach Christchurch about earthquake recovery MARTY SHARPE

EVENING POST/ PRESS HISTORIC COLLECTION THE FATE OF HUNDREDS: Cars in Napier streets were crushed by falling buildings when the 1931 earthquake struck.

Relevant offers

Napier's regeneration after the 1931 earthquake offers three valuable lessons to a city wanting to recover.

First, appoint skilled people to lead the recovery, give them extraordinary powers and trust them to make the right decisions. Second, act quickly. Third, don't skimp on funding for businesses and infrastructure.

After the 1931 earthquake ruined Napier, the first and second factors were achieved with flying colours. In today's political and regulatory environment this won't be so easy, or acceptable.

The third factor, in which the government of the day failed miserably, may be more achievable today, but its benefit if the first two factors are not accomplished is unknown.

The 7.9 earthquake on February 3, 1931, killed 258 people in Hawke's Bay and flattened the business centre of Napier, a city of more than 18,000 people, 162 of whom perished.

The immediate response was rescue, evacuation and then evaluation. The same water-cooler conversations about Christchurch were held about Napier 80 years ago, probably over tea and cigarettes: "Abandon the city", "Build it elsewhere", and "The people will never return".

Four weeks after the quake, Napier Borough Council and the coalition government of the day appointed two commissioners to get the city on its feet: John Saxon Barton and Lachlan Bain Campbell. Barton was a magistrate capable of making informed, swift decisions. Campbell was an engineer who won the Military Cross in World War I after serving with the New Zealand Tunnelling Corps.

They were known colloquially as dictators, but their appointment was welcomed by Napier's citizens and, when their work was completed two years later, they left the city as heroes.

It helped that red tape was virtually non-existent. In order to rebuild properties, owners had to show any planned building was designed to "resist earthquake shock". One of the legacies of the quake was new national building codes, brought into force in 1932.

The emphasis was getting businesses back up and running. By March the city had "Tin Town" – a 54-store complex of corrugated iron built by Fletcher Construction at the edge of the burnt-out business area.

Just as in Christchurch, grand schemes were floated for Napier, including rebuilding entirely in white. However, extravagant plans for an entertainment hall, theatre and hotel were mostly scrapped.

Throughout the Depression, the United Reform coalition government of the day, particularly prime minister George Forbes, was determined that the country would fend for itself. The same philosophy was applied to Hawke's Bay. The government would help in a limited way but, if the city was to survive, it had to do it largely alone.

Economist Simon Chapple, who analysed the economic impact of the quake in a 1997 paper for the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research, estimated the cost of damage at about 3.5 million – $168m today.

The Hawke's Bay Earthquake Act 1931 granted 1.5m to the province, of which 1.25m was for private relief and 250,000 for local bodies. On top of this, the government gave 274,000 for repairing public buildings, railway lines and bridges and immediate relief expenses. The province received a further 1m in charity from a relief fund and donations from around the world, meaning all up about 2.5m was contributed to the Bay, leaving a 1m shortfall.

The sum was nowhere near enough and local bodies were forced to raise loans. The council itself could not service the interest on its government loan, let alone the capital, and businesses were crippled by interest payments.

BY 1938 Napier was on the brink of bankruptcy and the Labour government of the day came to its rescue by writing off the council's loans, prompting howls of protest from Hastings, which was not granted the same favour.

Despite an impending financial crisis, Napier, and Hawke's Bay as a whole, came through the disaster well. Dr Chapple's research arrived at some astonishing findings, among which were:

The population boomed as people flocked to the area to find work "created by the earthquake destruction".

The building sector also boomed, as a result of reconstruction grants and loans.

Factory wages rose in the two years after the quake, as did productivity.

Most of central Napier's shops had reopened by late 1932 and the city had a "New Napier" celebration in January 1933.

The destruction allowed the commissioners to make some changes to the city. Streets were widened, veranda widths made uniform and power and phone lines were put under footpaths. Trams and tramlines that had been a cost to the council were removed.

A by-product of the debris from landslides and collapsed buildings was the flat land on which Marine Pde's gardens, memorials and soundshell were built. Napier's art deco and modernist architecture, already in vogue in the United States, was seen as an affordable way of rebuilding.

Whoever takes the helm in Christchurch will probably take comfort in Dr Chapple's paper, which New Zealand Institute of Economic Research principal economist Shamubeel Eaqub says is a good template, as both Hawke's Bay and Canterbury relied on agriculture, manufacturing and food processing.

"What is interesting about Napier is how quickly the region picked itself up. It just shows how resilient regional economies can be," Mr Eaqub says.

"But haste is absolutely important. That was so visible in Napier. We had people flooding into the place. Things were kick-started very quickly. We need to get the urgency. I think that might be the missing ingredient. If the infrastructure is not fixed quickly, that will lead to loss of people and businesses in the region."

However, the pace of reconstruction is likely to be slower than in Napier, partly because parts of Christchurch are unaffected, but also because democracy is likely to play a bigger part.

"There will be a need for executive decisions to be made and we will need a city plan that works," Mr Eaqub says. "We are going to need someone to make a decision on whether buildings are pulled down. We can't namby-pamby around too much".

Need for haste balanced with the need for preservation

Retired Napier architect Guy Natusch was 10 when the earthquake struck the city in February 1931.

His father, Rene, and uncles Aleck and Stanley of Natusch and Sons architects were among those who designed the art deco and modernist buildings for which the city has become famous.

Guy Natusch, now 90, remembers his father taking him through the rubble of the devastated city, then years later taking him through the new buildings and explaining their design.

The Natusch brothers designed the first building put up after the quake, the Market Reserve Building. It opened in 1932 and set the standard for what was to follow.

"It was a fantastic statement. After it went up, businessmen decided to build in a similar style," Mr Natusch says.

He recalls the concerted push by locals to get their city rebuilt.

"I have newspaper articles of the time describing the feeling that, if we don't get going, Hastings will develop and there will be no need for Napier other than a small service town ... and it made sense. But it was only one of the factors that drove things."

His father would often recount the remarkable work carried out by the two commissioners, John Barton, a magistrate, and Lachlan Campbell, an engineer, who took charge of rebuilding the city.

"I think the people who get all uptight about rebuilding are the ones who think it's dictatorship, not democracy. Of course it is, but it's like in wartime. In times of war or earthquakes, you've got to cut through that and give people extraordinary powers and trust them.

"They'll make mistakes but not as big as if you leave it for democracy and its cumbersome procedures that are necessary in normal times. There was no jumping up and down after Napier. There was frustration, but overall there was calm decision-making.

"The commissioners would listen and decisions would be made. All the while they kept the mayor informed. There was no red tape, or minimal bureaucracy.

"I think [mayor] Bob Parker has done a great job of leadership in Christchurch, but I think by now there should have been commissioners appointed. Perhaps I'm prejudiced by the way it was done in Napier."

Mr Natusch, who still works as an architectural heritage adviser, questions the attitude of Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee towards heritage buildings. Although he understands the need for haste to get the city thriving again, he says that needs to be balanced with the importance of preservation – something that Napier failed to do.

"In Napier, some of the buildings were bulldozed with what was perceived as essential development carried out before sitting down and considering what was inside them. They rushed in to demolish the remains of some buildings too soon.

"In Napier and now in Christchurch there are buildings that will be demolished unnecessarily.

"In Napier it was excusable because of ignorance. In Christchurch it is inexcusable because we have the knowledge."

Of buildings demolished in Napier, he most laments the loss of St Paul's Presbyterian Church, which withstood the quake but was gutted by fire. It stood as a ruin until 1950.

"It was a crime. It was a magnificent ruin. I pleaded that it remain. I said we needed a reminder. Overseas there are magnificent ruins kept. But New Zealanders hate ruins. We want to clean it all up, make it look pristine.

"After the war a lot of architects [in Europe] were calling for clearing the lot and building modern cities. Fortunately there were people who had them rebuilt, if not exactly as they were before then very sympathetic to the style of the past.

"I think Christchurch will agonise over this. But there may be some buildings they will rebuild with modern structural techniques to make them safe in the style they were."

- The Dominion Post