Who were Canterbury's winners and losers in 2014?

Kirk Hargreaves/Fairfax NZ SIGN OF SUMMER: Thousands of people walked or ran the inaugural Summer Starter event in Christchurch.

OPINION:

Looking back on 2014 inspires the usual platitudes so let's avoid them.

With 2010 and 2011 still in our minds, 2014 wasn't obviously special in the macro-sense.

A mild winter, steady rebuild advances and no major scandals or disasters gave the year an even feel. On further magnification, however, it takes on more character. We start to see the winners and losers, the trends and the challenges the region faces.

JOSEPH JOHNSON Annus horribilis: 2014 was not a great year for Roger Sutton.

Some of our Canterbury citizens had years to forget.

Former Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority chief executive Roger Sutton won't remember 2014 fondly and neither will business people like Anthony Gough whose Oxford Terrace complex stalled for lack of funds.

Other can look back with satisfaction. Local construction kingpins like Anthony Leighs, part owner of Leighs Construction, must be on a high and Mayor Lianne Dalziel can look back on a year of solid leadership and absence of major mishaps as she negotiated a path through Christchurch's financial crisis.

Stacy Squires Christchurch mayor Lianne Dalziel in May 2014.

Councillor Raf Manji established himself as the rock star of the council.

Busy Gerry Brownlee continued steaming along and, apart from gate crashing at Christchurch Airport, had a good year. His relationship with the media remained rocky.

Christchurch helped drive New Zealand's buoyant economy and most people who wanted to work could find a job.

Joseph Johnson ROCK STAR: City councillor Raf Manji.

The demand for labour gave Christchurch something of a war footing. It was not unusual to see women driving trucks and out on the roads shifting traffic cones. Overseas workers were like foreign troops coming in to help. The courts were full of rebuild workers, showing employment was reaching sections of the community not normally in the mainstream workforce.

The house repair programme was in full swing and big progress was made on the underground infrastructure. Larger, more difficult house repairs got under way.

Streets were repaired, new bars and restaurants opened and the inner city got some life back in the form of the trams. Flooding in Flockton Basin highlighted new difficulties presented by the post-earthquake terrain.

Certainly 2014 was a year closer to normality for Christchurch citizens. So sit back and relive the last 12 months.

Weather

We all care about weather and 2014 gave us lots to talk about.

In February, a supercell thunderstorm sent two tornados swirling through the region with Amberley worst affected. The storm felled powerlines, sparked fires and pummelled the area with large hailstones.

Rain arrived by the deluge in February and March with areas of low-lying Christchurch inundated. Flooding in March was a disaster for residents in the Flockton Basin in St Albans and homes in Mairehau, Richmond, Woolston and Beckenham were also hit. A hillside collapsed in Lyttelton and 1500 litres of jet fuel spilled into the harbour.

The region was hit by the edges of a tropical cyclone in late May. It washed out farm tracks and hill country was pockmarked with landslips between Clarence and Kekerengu, north of Kaikoura. Flooding left crops and pastures water-logged in southern Canterbury and the storm battered parts of Banks Peninsula with pines trees badly hit.

Snow and low temperatures in late May fuelled hopes of a cracker ski season but winter was generally mild and the ski season was a fizzer.

Spring was cold, windy and changeable and the summer hasn't been much different. Mt Hutt posted its heaviest snowfall in November and crops in mid-Canterbury were damaged by hail.

Agriculture

The brakes went on the dairy industry this year. World prices dropped 50 per cent in nine months and Fonterra's forecast of a payout at $4.70 a kilogram of milksolids for the 2014/15 season was well down on the previous season's $8.40.

Many farmers operating recently converted farms will be hoping their debt repayment projections stand the test of reality.

One of the biggest potential boosts to agricultural production got under way in March with the start of the $140 million first stage of the Central Plains Water irrigation scheme. The largest irrigation project in the South Island will eventually supply more water to 60,000 hectares.

Export beef prices hit their highest levels in more than a decade due to a worldwide shortage caused mainly by droughts in the US and Australia. The prospect of $100 lambs cheered grumpy sheep farmers. Not a great year for deer farmers, though, as venison prices dropped in the early part of the year and recovered only moderately towards the end. Cheaper venison from places like Spain are a threat to the top-dollar NZ product.

Wool prices were steady and there was good news from China where buyers are showing more interest in coarser wools.

All exporters could do with a lower NZ dollar.

Townies will feel the effects of the dairy downturn over the next few years although the rebuild will be a cushion.

Sport

The trophy cabinet was pretty empty for most of Christchurch's big teams. The Crusaders bombed out in a thrilling Super 15 final in Sydney and the Tactix, the city's netball team, had another lacklustre season coming last in the Trans-Tasman Netball League. The footballers also came a cropper with Canterbury United not making the playoffs.

League's Canterbury Bulls salvaged some of the city's sporting pride with a win in the National Provincial Championship and both the men's and women's softball team won the National Fastpitch Championship. The Canterbury Wizards nabbed the Plunket Shield.

Some brilliant individual performances lifted an average year.

Woodend's Anton Cooper, 19, won a Commonwealth Games gold medal on his cross-country mountain bike and shot putter Tom Walsh, from Timaru, ended the year among the world's top throwers.

We shouldn't forget the contribution of the Canterbury All Blacks to the victorious UK tour and Canterbury's Steve Hansen sterling performance as coach.

Business

Business in Canterbury was predictably dominated by construction, above and below ground, and dairying. The downstream effects were felt around the country.

Commercial and public buildings worth $1 billion were consented for construction in Christchurch in 2014, twice as much as any other year on electronic record.

Vehicles were a hot seller in the region with over $400m spent on vehicles and car parts between July and September.

Construction giant Fletcher increased its dividend to shareholders although whether this was due to the rebuild is hard to say, even if it did score the $300m justice and emergencies precinct. Hawkins, another major player in the rebuild, announced a new yearly turnover target of $1b and home builders like Mike Greer and Horncastle can look back on a bumper year.

Unfortunately the same cannot be said for many smaller construction firms who came to grief this year. Running a construction company is not as easy as it looks and one company failure can bring many others down.

Ngai Tahu strengthened its place in the Canterbury economy with its commercial arm Ngāi Tahu Holdings ending the year with a record net operating surplus of $83 million and a net profit of $161m. When taken with gains in the value of Ryman and other investments, total returns were $213m.

The ratepayer-owned company Christchurch City Holdings Ltd (CCHL) also improved operating revenue with $1.3b earned up to June this year in contrast to $945m for the previous 12 months.

Canterbury led the country in job growth. About 34,400 new jobs were created in the past year in Canterbury – 13,800 in construction and about 7800 in retail and accommodation.

Dairy giant Fonterra started a battle for South Island dairy farmers' milk.

It launched a new subsidiary, mymilk, based in Christchurch, which farmers can supply without having to fork out for expensive shares in Fonterra.

The battle pitches Fonterra against other sizeable South Island dairy companies, Synlait, half owned by Chinese interests, Chinese-owned Oceania Dairy and Westland Milk Products.

China's largest dairy producer, Yili, which owns Oceania Dairy, officially opened its milk processing plant in Glenavy. The facility will receive $400m in upgrades over the next five years.

Politics

National's resounding win was seen as support for the Government's handling of post-earthquake Canterbury rebuild but National creamed Labour in most regions. Labour's Canterbury-targeted policies, including a publicly-owned insurance company and an earthquake court, garnered few extra votes and the party got less support than 2011.

National took 51.2 per cent of the Canterbury party vote to Labour's 22.4 per cent.

One of the biggest winners and grinners was Christchurch Central MP Nicky Wagner who after declaring her seat unwinnable sprinted home with a margin of more than 2100 votes.

Rebuild

Well it really seemed to be happening this year. The unglamorous underground stuff posted some major gains and construction of the $300m justice and emergency services precinct – one of the Government's key anchor projects - and the new bus exchange started.

After months of speculation, the Government announced the winning development consortium for the Convention Centre Precinct. A public-private-partnership between the Crown and Ngai Tahu Property, the Carter Group and Plenary Conventions will deliver the project but other details are still vague.

There was bad news for those who hoped the pig ugly Forsyth Barr building, bequeathed to us by Sir Bob Jones, would bite the dust like some of the city's other monstrosities. The building, we heard, will be turned into the new Crowne Plaza Hotel, scheduled to open in 2016.

With building owners still struggling to get tenants for new buildings in the CBD, a much needed shot in the arm was received by Kathmandu and Vodafone announcing their commitment to the city's innovation precinct. Developer Richard Peebles and McKenzie and Willis shareholders announced a project to build a $50m complex on the shop's old site on the corner of Tuam and High streets.

The restored and rebuilt Isaac Theatre Royal opened, showing what can be done with a nice facade and a lot of money.

Development around the core of the city was at crawl speed with timeframes pushed out for anchor projects and private developments including Antony Gough's The Terrace becoming bogged down.

The Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team got 81 per cent of the way through its central city work and 59 per cent of the way through its entire programme. More road repairs and sealing started in November and December.

Council

The new council appeared a more harmonious and industrious bunch this year and new chief executive Karleen Edwards restructured her organisation.

The new executive team and tier of senior managers has brought new blood into the council.

Independent financial reviews by first KordaMentha and then Cameron Partners revealed the true extent of the council's money woes. It cannot avoid the unpleasant reality of a $1.2b funding shortfall and no-one is coming to the rescue.

The council took the first step towards asset sales, signalling its intention to raise $550m by releasing capital from the companies it owns through CCHL. That could see the council selling down its stakeholding in Orion, Lyttelton Port of Christchurch and Christchurch International Airport Ltd.

Ngai Tahu, with a healthy balance sheet and the ability to borrow, is poised to buy into some of the gilt-edged assets.

The alternative of raising rates and taking on more debt doesn't seem likely.

By year's end the council had regained some much needed credibility by getting back accreditation of its consenting department.

Crime

Thankfully the year passed relatively quietly from a crime point of view.

The most shocking event was the murder of two Work and Income employees, Peggy Noble, 67, and Leigh Cleveland, 55, who were shot dead in the Work and Income Ashburton office on September 1.

Gunman Russel John Tully, 48, rode off on his bike and was later arrested after huge manhunt. He is facing murder and other charges.

Aaron Rhys McDonald, 39, was jailed for a minimum of 21 years for the "cruel" drug-fuelled murder of a young Christchurch caregiver and attack on two hitch- hikers on the West Coast.

Gangs consolidated their presence in the city with new bikie gangs readying themselves for fresh opportunities.

The region's roads had their usual share of tragedies. The deaths of several cyclists highlighted the dangerous relationship between bikes and bigger vehicles on the roads. Taiwanese cyclist Ming-Chih Hsieh, who was touring New Zealand on his bike, was killed when hit by a truck in Hornby on September 29. The truck driver had previously been convicted over a fatal crash with a cyclist.

Road tragedies don't get much worse than the deaths of Sally Summerfield, 49, her daughter, Ella Summerfield, 12, and Ella's friend Abigail "Abi" Hone, 12, when visiting Dutch businessman Johannes Appelman failed to stop at a stop sign near Rakaia on June 1.

A-list Hollywood actor Chris Pine, in town for the Z for Zachariah movie shoot, caused a media storm when he appeared in the Ashburton District Court on a drink driving charge.

On the white collar crime front, the Serious Fraud Office prosecuted directors and chief executive over an alleged $1.58b fraud. Only Timaru lawyer Edward Sullivan was convicted on fraud offences. He received a sentence of 12 months home detention. Former director Bob White and former chief executive Lachie McLeod were acquitted on all charges.

Canterbury district commander Superintendent Gary Knowles announced he was moving to Thailand to take up a police liaison role at the New Zealand Embassy in Bangkok. He ended the year under investigation by the Independent Police Conduct Authority over a complaint from a staff member.

Police officialdom and media had a testy relationship throughout the year. This will need to improve for the good of the public.

Education

The Education Ministry's review of school deciles in November meant a third of schools' rankings rose, a third fell, and a third stayed the same. Schools still battling the effects of the quake on their communities, particularly in the east, vowed to fight the changes which cost them thousands of dollars in funding.

Racism became a topic of debate at Canterbury University in September after the Engineering Society (Ensoc) RoUndie 500 event ran a competition to feature the most outrageous theme. Fun was poked at women, Islam, Malaysia Airlines and the deadly Ebola crisis. Associate Professor Ekant Veer, who is of Indian descent, returned his student-voted lecturer of the year award in a stand against an "underbelly of hate" and racism on campus. The university has vowed to encourage inclusiveness.

Phillipstown School ended its battle against its closure and merger with Woolston School. After 18 months of legal wrangling, including a successful judicial review in 2013, the merger was confirmed in April.

Health

The rebuild of Christchurch and Burwood hospitals started but not without parking pain for staff and visitors. Construction of new health facilities in Kaikoura and Ashburton began. The Christchurch Hospital redevelopment, the largest hospital project in New Zealand, is expected to be difficult as work must go on around continuing services.

The pressure on mental health services continued to rise with more homeless mental health patients taking up beds. A pre-election request for extra funding went unmet.

Christchurch Hospital staff began preparing for the nightmare scenario of Ebola coming to Christchurch by training in use of full body personal protective gear.

In November, nearly 4000 Cantabrians gave their physical and mental health a boost by taking part in the inaugural Press Summer Starter fun run and walk.

Music

Heard of Doprah? Well, you will. Canterbury duo Stephen Marr and Indira Force played the support slot for Lorde at her post-Grammy homecoming show. Doprah were then announced as the "Next Big Sound" by US Billboard. Their self-titled debut EP was recorded in Marr's bedroom in Christchurch. They ended the year by playing prestigious festivals in the United States and were nominated for Breakthrough Artist of the Year at the NZ Music Awards.

Yumi Zouma, comprising the trio Charlie Ryder, Kim Pflaum and Josh Burgess met each other via the Christchurch music scene in pre-quake times. The trio became an overnight success story when they signed to Brooklyn-based independent label Cascine this year. They toured with global sensation Chet Faker. They followed this with an extensive European tour and festival performances in the United States.

Christchurch teenager Maya Payne attracted international attention with her music this year. The Year 13 Burnside High School student spent her school holidays in April at Golden Age studios, where Lorde recorded her Grammy-Award winning album. Her debut EP will be released soon.

Property

Damaged homes were in hot demand from both homeowners and investors. Prices for homes in as-is condition exceeded $1m in desirable spots. Buyers doing quick and cheap fix-up jobs and reselling the homes with big mark-ups sparked warnings.

New house construction reached an all-time high as subdivisions filled up fast, making Canterbury the house-building capital of New Zealand.

- The Press