Will heads roll in Christchurch's beleaguered planning department?

David Walker Christchurch's planning chief Mike Theelen faces a three pronged review of his department.

For some, it is black and white. Christchurch City Council's planning department has been doing a useless job for years. And it is about to get what's coming.

It failed early on after the earthquakes because Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee had to take over the council's draft central city plan and create his own recovery blueprint.

Planning map of Christchurch. Green marks new residential developments, blue marks new business developments. The stars mark "key activity centres", which are essentially malls.

It failed again in taking too long to get going with a general rethink of the city's planning map. Brownlee had to set in motion the fast-track Land Use Recovery Plan (Lurp), followed by an equally accelerated District Plan review, to impose certainty on a quivering landscape.

Now it has failed even this test, judging by the rough words of the Government-appointed independent hearings panel charged with pushing through the District Plan before the Earthquake Minister's statutory powers disappear next year.

Every resource management lawyer in town is talking about what the panel chair, former Christchurch High Court judge Sir John Hansen, said about the council's chief planning officer Mike Theelen, when ripping into the suggested draft version.

Kirk Hargreaves Ngai Tahu's Tony Sewell. Consenting for Wigram Skies subdivision "was a disgrace. It took over 10 years."

After blasting the council's work on a new manual of planning regulations for the usual reasons – vague, wordy, ineffective – Hansen went much further in singling out Theelen personally, saying he seemed surprisingly ill-informed about the draft's contents given he was meant to be in charge.

"That points to a lack of quality control. This would appear to have also contributed to the serious shortcomings of the Notified Version," Hansen grimly noted in his March verdict.

The paragraph containing these comments has been snipped out and is circulating in gleeful emails. "After that, this guy's gotta go," one prominent developer, no fan, chortled.

Stephen Goodenough Wigram Skies was surrounded by suburban housing and should have been simple to sign off, critics say.

And then in May, the other shoe dropped. Council chief executive Dr Karleen Edwards announced a three-prong probe into the planning department.

Edwards is already running a more general "Great for Christchurch" review of the council's structure to deal with criticisms that Christchurch City Council has grown so large and bureaucratic that it has lost sight of the community it is meant to be serving.

The axe is expected to swing in the second half of this year once the results are in. And it will have sent shivers through the planning department that Edwards is spending some $100,000 on outside experts to report on the quality of its work in three areas.

Daniel Tobin Can Christchurch City Council turn commercial spaces such as Riccarton Mall into village centres?

Separately, the reviews will consider its efforts with the replacement District Plan, its "busy body" Urban Design Panel, and its day-to-day resource consenting behaviour.

Again, this news prompted a flurry of gleeful texts and emails within Christchurch's development circles. Somebody is about to get what's coming at last.

But is life so simple? Are the struggles of Christchurch's town planners an issue of bad culture and poor leadership, or more a reflection of the mad haste to rebuild this city after the earthquakes? Then perhaps too is there a larger, national-scale dilemma around city building?

★ ★ ★

Theelen's office is a pleasant hidey-hole tucked in a quiet corner beyond a stairwell and public meeting room in the council building. We are discussing the large map of Christchurch pinned on his wall.

He is wiry and mild-mannered, described even by his critics as a thoroughly likeable person. Like former CCC chief executive Tony Marryatt, Theelen came to Christchurch from Hamilton City Council a decade ago.

Unlike his old boss, who was eventually shunted when the council lost its consenting accreditation in 2013, Theelen remains in high regard as the organisation's strategic brain.

It has been his job to shape Christchurch's pattern of habitation and economic growth ever since the key regional document, the Urban Development Strategy (UDS), first began to be developed under previous mayors, Garry Moore and Sir Bob Parker.

The obvious tension for all New Zealand cities, says Theelen, is how to manage growth. Well, in fact take that back a step. The concern of every city, apart from Auckland, is first how to attract growth.

The UDS – the plan guiding Christchurch to 2041 – started with the recognition that the city has a sharply greying population and therefore must grow its numbers simply to keep its demographics in healthy balance. No-one wants to be living in the South Island's largest rest home in another 20 years.

But then the problem is that to gear for growth, the fastest way would be to throw away the rule book. Let Christchurch sprawl out into the plains, taking advantage of cheap fringe land. Worry later about the resulting traffic congestion, the lack of parks, schools and sewer lines.

This would favour the quick-buck developers, make their lives easy. However urban planners can see that long term, cities benefit by intensification, pushing things in the opposite direction.

Accommodating growth within Christchurch's existing footprint would be more efficient in terms of transport and infrastructure. A denser city would also have the energy and excitement to attract the young and creative.

It is a balancing act, says Theelen. And the UDS was a careful agreement about the correct numbers.

Long-term, the goal was to slow the release of city fringe land so that by 2041, with Christchurch reaching a population of 550,000, some 70 per cent of new development would be taking place through the building of central city apartments and suburban town houses.

Then along came the earthquakes and all this future-oriented thinking proved its worth, says Theelen.

Tapping a finger on his map, he says step back from the political noise and you can see the UDS not only exists intact but its principles are being reinforced through the Lurp and District Plan process.

There is the talk of the city splurging westward as greenfield sections are rapidly released to the market. People are saying sprawl has happened, the horse has bolted. Yet look at the reality of where those new blocks of green are, Theelen says, at least the areas under CCC jurisdiction.

To the southwest, a large chunk of residential expansion is filling in the paddocks circling Halswell. And a matching industrial zone expansion is happening around Hornby.

However it is all very digestible as further development. It is good land on new motorway routes with new main sewer lines. The area was already ear-marked for subdivision under the UDS and is simply happening a decade or so quicker.

Then across in Belfast it is the same story. Already ear-marked, the right place to expand.

Theelen says the only unplanned bits so far as the council is concerned are the two big blocks that the Lurp is allowing on the city's northern edge – Ngai Tahu's 2300-home Prestons subdivision in Marshland, and the 2200-home Highfield Park development on 260 hectares of farmland near Redwood.

They are going to be expensive from the ratepayers' point of view because they are opening up a third section of the city where the council needs to build supporting infrastructure well ahead of schedule.

There is also some doubt about whether Highfield will go ahead, as its developers have run into difficulties and the holding company put into liquidation.

But Theelen says even if both Prestons and Highfield get built, you can see from the map they in fact rather neatly plug an existing wedge-shaped hole in the city's perimeter.

Don't forget Christchurch has natural boundaries, he says. On two sides, the city is contained by the Port Hills and the sea.

Then there is the barrier to development right along its northwest margin because of the airport and its flight path, and also the need to protect the aquifers – the city's water supply – under the surrounding farmland.

So there is a geography that imposes a shape. And now, despite all the talk of the Lurp allowing a great uncontrolled lurch out into the plains, the reality is Christchurch city is simply going to occupy this available space somewhat more snugly. The city will retain a pretty ideal circular design, regardless of what happens in Rolleston, Kaiapoi and the other small centres.

The forethought built into the Christchurch UDS has worked, says Theelen. It was why quick land decisions could be taken. And people generally misunderstand the council's intensification ambitions, he says.

A stated goal is to increase the population living inside the Four Avenues from 8000 to 30,000 by 2026. And that target gets all the attention. However the UDS in fact agreed a "collection of villages" approach where as much planning effort would go into the development of a network of suburban hubs.

These are the yellow stars dotting Theelen's map, the key activity centres (KACs) of Barrington, Halswell, Hornby, Riccarton, Northlands, Belfast, The Palms/Shirley, New Brighton and Eastgate/Linwood. Fairly obviously, this is mostly a list of Christchurch's shopping malls.

Theelen says the earthquakes have focused minds on the needs of Christchurch's worst affected areas. The central city clearly requires a huge investment in planning. The Government was right to weigh in there.

And there have been some impressive community-led recovery efforts in the smaller, worst-hit centres. Sumner, Lyttelton and Sydenham in particular have been supported in producing their own local masterplans.

The malls came through the quakes with only minor damage – or at least damage their commercial operators were fast to repair. So they have been somewhat forgotten in the public debates.

However the future health of Christchurch, the aspect of the city which the District Plan really needs to address, is how development can be channelled so that these mall-dominated KACs become more like real communities.

Theelen acknowledges the obvious. The malls are large commercial entities that like to organise their part of town to best suit their own corporate interests. They have become so powerful that it is difficult to make them do things they don't want to do.

The village ideal is to have an open, pedestrian, public space where people shop but also meet. And then these shopping centres naturally intensify with apartments and townhouses over time because they become an attractive place to live near, and work in.

Theelen says there is no point talking about ripping out Riccarton's Westfield Mall. "At one level, Riccarton is doing well. It's got a sound commercial basis. It houses people. There are vehicle flows. It's functioning."

But the UDS established the long-term goal of finding ways to promote the evolution of these mall areas into proper urban hubs.

They should develop libraries, halls, transport connections and public spaces. There should be concentrations of offices as well as housing. They ought to grow an identity beyond that of a box of shops attached to a car park.

In this way, the densification of Christchurch could be achieved by a spreading the load across a network of busier town centres rather than having to think of jamming everything into a high-rise central city.

"Our thesis is very much that we should strengthen those nodes and strengthen the corridors connecting the nodes," says Theelen.

Light rail links were proposed in the council's original draft city masterplan. That could have catalysed a change. People would have understood the pattern.

Yet Theelen says at the moment even justifying a bus service to connect the KACs is a challenge.

"When we have enough demand to sustain a high-speed bus network between the nodes and the central city, then we will know that our intensification plans are having an effect."

But anyway, he says, the point is that when you look at the current map of Christchurch, you have to say – at least in terms of its strategic goals – all that pre-quake town planning has turned out to be good for something.

Despite the level of noise and frustration about the detail or execution, the principles of the UDS are continuing to be affirmed through the recovery process.

★ ★ ★

Talk to some of the old hands, like former three-term Christchurch mayor Garry Moore, or former Environment Southland chief executive Ciaran Keogh (who was shortlisted as a replacement for Marryatt in 2011), and you get a picture of why life is not easy for town planners.

Moore says the Resource Management Act (RMA) brought in a culture of effects-based thinking after it was introduced in the early 1990s.

It was why Christchurch's ring of malls happened. Under the RMA, the council could no longer prohibit such development directly. So planners responded by trying to control development with manuals full of rules.

Moore says it became about fighting Environment Court battles over individual projects rather than concentrating on community needs.

"The planners seemed to be planning for buildings rather than for people. It was planning in the abstract. The people became almost clip-ons to the process."

Keogh says it goes back to Rogernomics and the gutting of the public service. Once New Zealand had its cities being designed by real engineers – experts at the Ministry of Works.

They kept it simple, says Keogh, laying out the basic arterial plan, the public infrastructure of roads, sewers and power – enough to create a sensible shape. Then private development was left to flesh out the bones.

"In the 1970s, the Ministry of Works had a directorate of town and country planning. Every major project that's still being talked about – Auckland's motorways, the tunnels under the harbour, Wellington's Transmission Gully – were all developed as plans back then."

Keogh says that national-level expertise has been lost. "No-one in Wellington now has a clue."

Instead, you have the modern story of local councils trying to micro-manage the effects of development because they lack any real tools to control the malls, the supermarkets, the subdividers, the other large commercial players.

So there is a context, a driver of behaviours. Town planners are meant to deliver a long-term view on growth, but they have little power beyond endless rule-writing.

They can always put a brake on development. But as with the UDS and its desire for a "collection of villages", promoting a particular pattern of growth is hard – especially if it runs counter to more immediate market forces.

Yet even so, in post-quake Christchurch there are plenty who are saying CCC's planning department actually needs sorting out. A bunkered mindset has taken hold. And this is why the council is not stepping up to the real world demands of dealing with the recovery.

Some developers have played it for a laugh. Richard Peebles is building a crop of office blocks in the central city. He was into the fifth month of seeking a consent for a building in Cambridge Tce when the council was still asking him silly questions, like how he intended to wash the building's windows.

"With warm water and a soapy cloth," wrote back Peebles caustically, as if a developer wouldn't have considered the design needs of such a basic maintenance chore already.

But through the District Plan hearings, other developers, like Ngai Tahu Property's Tony Sewell, have vented some true anger.

Giving evidence to Hansen's panel about Ngai Tahu's Wigram Skies subdivision, Sewell said: "It was a disgrace. It took over 10 years."

Sewell says the ex-air field was surrounded by suburban housing and should have been simple to sign off.

"I think there was something like 20 project managers ... given the job of Wigram. A complete lack of consistency right throughout the process.

"So if that gives a small view of our relationship with the city council and their complete non-performance, that might give you a bit of an answer."

Every developer has some story: The $30,000 bill for a soil contamination study because some planner came across a historical mention there was once a laundry on the site.

The Urban Design Panel's request that a bank building's upper floors be given over to residential apartments because the council wanted to encourage mixed use in the central city.

"It would have meant the extra cost of two sets of lifts, two separate street accesses. And no bank would want to share its building like that," confides one of the developers involved.

A common complaint is the way that council planners have a habit of stopping the clock on consent applications by firing off some trivial, fact-checking request. This gives the council time to work at its own pace. Or worse still, use it as a means to control troublesome developers.

So there is a light in which the behaviour is understandable. Often pulling in different directions, relations between town planners and developers have become frankly adversarial.

But with the council now responding to the public complaints of the independent hearing panel and launching a formal review of the city's planning department, its culture will come under close scrutiny.

Strategically, Theelen's department may have got a tick, however it might not have met reasonable expectations on its execution.

Theelen says he welcomes the external investigation. "What we want the reviews to tell us is where we can do better. And I'm hoping they will say some things were well done, but I'm sure they will say there were opportunities to improve."

The reports are due back by early July. Whether heads will roll – and whether replacing heads can change much if there is a basic issue around controlling city building in New Zealand – is the question that will follow.

Someone, somewhere is bound to get whatever is coming. Meanwhile, Christchurch will still have the job of making good on a growth plan that most people appear to agree continues to be its right long-term future direction.

- The Press