Wood finds a niche in rebuild designs MICHAEL BERRY

DON SCOTT/Fairfax NZ QUAKE-RESISTANT: NZ Wood chief executive Jane Arnott and Sheppard and Rout director Jasper van der Lingen with laminated veneer lumber similar to that which is the basis of the Merritt building behind them in Victoria St.

Canterbury architecture, traditionally built from stone, has been imbued with a more lightweight philosophy since the quakes, a Christchurch architect told a city timber construction expo.

More than 100 architects, engineers and suppliers went to the Wood Smart Construction Seminar at the Addington Events Centre last Wednesday.

Sheppard & Rout director Jasper van der Lingen spoke about the firm's design work on Tony Merritt's building in Victoria St.

It was an Expan timber-framed building with post-tensioned steel tendons running through the laminated veneer lumber (LVL) wooden beams.

LVL is wood which has been engineered to be longer, thicker and stronger than natural timber.

The frame is designed to move during quakes to reduce damage to the building, but allows the building to "self-centre" after shaking finishes.

The design was the "third generation" of the post-tension timber technology, van der Lingen said.

"One of the decisions we made really early on was we wanted to make a real architectural feature of this technology. We didn't want to hide it."

The building was drawn up during continuing aftershocks and the plan was to use the overt technology to reassure people of its safety.

The warm feeling conveyed by the massive timber structure helped, too, he said.

"Traditionally, the architecture of Christchurch has been of masonry. The most stunning buildings have been made of stone, brick and concrete."

He could understand the reasons, stemming from the settler's desire to make his mark on a new land and to create lasting new landmarks.

"We've been a city that's used to building big, heavy buildings that look like they are going to last forever.

"After the quakes we've all kind of had the feeling that that kind of architecture is not as appropriate in shaky isles like these."

Instead, lightweight, flexible buildings that move with tremors to absorb their energy were better suited, he said.

That thinking was germinating "the seeds of a new architecture" in the city.

To his knowledge, the Merritt building was the first timber- framed commercial build designed speculatively rather than for a specific tenant.

The building would cost about $2500 a square metre to erect, which was not a bad price, he said.

Because the building had a high seismic resilience, a "very competitive" insurance deal had been nailed down by the owner, he said. Since design, owner Tony Merritt has signed up three tenants.

LVL timber was not treated, so it cannot be exposed to the elements, he said.

"So the only way to display it is to put it behind as much glass as you can."

One of the walls close to a neighbouring building had to be built in concrete because it was the easiest and cheapest way to achieve the required fire rating, he said.

However, it was imprinted with timber grain to link it with the rest of the structure.

University of Canterbury associate professor of engineering, Stefano Pampanin, said using different construction media in the same building was becoming easier.

It broadened the spectrum of what engineers and architects could do with their designs, he said.

Many architects enjoyed being able to use the best material for the situation, rather than being trapped by one substance, he said.

A few years ago concrete was unrivalled due to several factors that combined to afford the material a sort of "arrogance" of position, he said.

A booming economy meant more buildings going up and companies were mostly relying on simple designs that could be churned out by newly minted engineers and architects.

However, the global boom meant steel was much more expensive than concrete and timber designs were yet to fully develop and come to prominence.

There had been a one-or-the- other attitude among designers when it came to steel-reinforced concrete, structural steel or timber frames, but that had started to fall away since the quakes, he said.

Now, the materials had matured and they were more easily conglomerated. The three industry supply chains were also more receptive to be used in conjunction with "rival" materials as well.

"Concrete is not seeing timber as 'the invader'," Pampanin said.

The timber seismic technologies - like the contemporary designs for all materials - were simply new ways of achieving the same 3000-year-old structural goals, he said.

The designers of ancient Greek temples knew the threat of earthquakes and countered them using available materials.

Some temples were built on layers of charcoal and wool fleeces to isolate the structure from the ground.

And pillars, cut into stacked sections and locked together with lead pins in the centre, allowed the building to rock, while the weight of the heavy roof provided stability.

Post-tension timber did the same thing, except it replaced the pushing force of the heavy roof with the pull of steel.

The university had come up with low-damage technology for all three materials, which were being called "plug and play" because they were designed like fuses. They would absorb the destructive force of an earthquake, but be easily and relatively cheaply replaced, he said.

If the new seismic construction technology is given enough of a boost, it can cause a lasting step change.

And if enough new buildings are built using the techniques developed over the past decade it will become the norm, he said.

- The Press

Comments