Christchurch's Jason Harris left baffled after post-quake insurance bid denied twice.
The Earthquake Commission (EQC) has about 5500 second-time repairs to carry out on Canterbury homes because of poor workmanship, failed or incorrect repair strategies, scope omissions and new damage.
EQC has been forced to take on new full-time staff after being flooded by homeowners wanting remedial work to their properties and it can not say when the second round of repairs will be completed.
As of December 15, EQC had 746 first-time repairs to do under the Canterbury Home Repair Programme and a further 480 claims were yet to be settled. More claims may yet be pushed over the $100,000 damage cap and be passed on to private insurers.
A source close to EQC told Stuff it would take at least two years to complete remedial repairs.
About 80 inspections were being carried out weekly, Price said, and the organisation was "exploring options to go faster".
An August 2015 briefing, released to the Labour Party under the Official Information Act, showed EQC expected to receive more than 7000 requests for remedial repairs by the end of March 2016.
Fletcher EQR used to manage such requests and had completed 884 remedial repairs before EQC took over at the start of May, it said.
The briefing said EQC's "current process and resourcing" was unable to meet the demand and needed to recruit 29 full-time staff members, 21 from EQR and 8 new EQC employees, at a cost of about $1.5 million.
An EQC spokesman said between 45 and 50 staff worked in the post-repair enquiry and MBIE response teams.
When MBIE released its findings last year, EQC said about 3600 properties would need to be revisited to ensure work was up to the Building Code.
The EQC spokesman said as of December 22, 604 properties had been checked.
More than a third had been checked off as being up to code and not requiring any remedial work while the data for the remaining 389 was still being reviewed, he said.
Almost 75,000 people have visited the multimillion-dollar playground, between Oxford Tce, Manchester, Madras and Armagh streets, since it opened less than three weeks ago.
Shop owners in the historic New Regent St have reported an increase in foot traffic since the playground opened and the tables outside the street's cafes are popular spots.
Last year should have also brought the completion of the $116 million Avon River precinct but the deadline was pushed out a year.
Only the first stage near the Antigua Boatsheds, known as Watermark, has been completed.
The in-river works have been completed but work is still needed around the Bridge of Remembrance, north frame and waterfront area bordering the convention centre side.
The controversial revamp of Victoria Sq, as part of the river precinct, will begin early this year.
Two days before Christmas church leaders and the Government announced the Church Property Trust, which owns the cathedral, was considering the option of reinstating the earthquake-damaged Christ Church Cathedral, which would take until 2022.
Building a new cathedral would cost an estimated $66m and be completed in 2019.
In terms of Crown-led anchor projects, 2016 should bring the completion of the Avon River precinct, construction of the justice and emergency services precinct and the public spaces as part of the south frame and innovation precinct.
he first new homes in Christchurch's east frame will go on the corner of Latimer Square and Hereford St, but construction will not start until October.
Chosen developer Fletcher Residential has finalised its contract with the Crown, clearing the way for the project to start.
Steve Evans, from Fletcher Building, said they were doing detailed designs and would start site works in mid-2016.
By Monday night, the end of the holiday season, 40,928 people had passed through the gallery's doors since reopening on December 19.
The gallery had been off limits for nearly five years after the 2011 earthquakes, when it was first a nerve centre for the emergency response, then the site of a major repair programme.
A $60-million repair programme was finished late last year.
Cera missed several recovery milestones set by its bosses in Wellington, the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, including completing land acquisitions and demolitions in the central city and residential red zones.
Cera and the Christchurch City Council announced the formation of Regenerate Christchurch, the new rebuild agency to take over from Cera when the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act expires in April.
After months of delayed negotiations, the Crown called time on the winning group behind the Breathe Urban Village development and is now looking to sell the land to other private sector interests.
Groups launched legal action against both EQC and Crown-owned insurer Southern Response.
The two resignations pale in comparison to the more than 300 staffers who left EQC in the last financial year.
EQC is now 97.7 per cent through the Canterbury Home Repair Programme according to the scorecard on its website and says up to 80 under-floor repair checks are being carried out each week.
It spent the first half of the year trying to piece together a Long Term Plan that would address its $1.2 billion funding shortfall and put the city on track to financial health.
The year ended on a positive note with the council announcing just before Christmas that it had settled its multimillion-dollar insurance claim. In February it should pocket $635m in a global settlement covering all its quake-damaged above-ground assets, including Lancaster Park.
The rising tide of discontent was only quelled when Mayor Lianne Dalziel and Environment Minister Nick Smith announced at the end of September they were withdrawing the coastal hazard provisions from the Replacement Christchurch District Plan.
A drawn-out restructure of council jobs made 2015 a tough year for those employed by the organisation. About 180 positions were disestablished and 134 new roles created in the restructure, which was calculated to shave about $3.8m from the council's annual $170m staffing budget.
The year will also be remembered as the year work began on restoring the Town Hall and plans for a new multimillion-dollar sports hub in the southwest of the city were signed off.
After several years of drama with red zoning, demolition, house building, rising prices and spiralling rents, Christchurch's residential property market in 2015 was dull.
House building slowed from last year, leading to some developers offering incentives to lure buyers.
Prices levelled off as more homes were fixed or rebuilt.
Rents fell about 10 per cent during the year, as the balance of supply and demand shifted
Central-city construction has corrected the under-supply of office space and with most big tenants sorted for premises, an over-supply is looming in some places.
Meanwhile on the commercial property scene, industrial property remains sought after by investors and tenants as the rebuild pushes on.
Suburban offices are getting harder to fill, as post-quake leases expire and businesses head back to town.
Across all commercial property sectors, low interest rates have boosted demand as investors seek to better bank returns.
More international investors are showing up alongside local and national names, a trend expected to continue in 2016.
Nearly all eligible property owners have now accepted a Crown offer for their red-zoned land following Canterbury's earthquakes.
The push for a full payout of the 2007-08 rateable value (RV) for red-zoned properties – particularly from property owners in the Port Hills area – meant many could close out 2015 with relief and plans for the future.
Yes we are happy – it's just a shame it's taken five years to get to this point.
We've been pushing for a long time to get [the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority] Cera to make us a fair offer."
In May, Duncan spoke about having his plans for a dream home dashed when his empty section was red-zoned.
The timing of the offer and payout for his section, which was finalised three weeks ago, meant they could move forward with their lives, he said.
Cera acting chief executive John Ombler said 98 per cent of eligible property owners in the residential red zone had accepted Crown offers to date.
Ombler said of 7871 properties eligible for offers, 7720 had accepted an offer, and many of those had now settled with the Crown.
The latest wellbeing survey conducted by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) shows almost a quarter of respondents say their lives have improved in the year to September 2015.
Perceptions of Cera are at an all-time low though, with only 29 per cent feeling confident in the Government agency's decision-making. Confidence in Cera has been trending downwards since a peak of 41 per cent in September 2012.
The legislation behind Cera expires in April next year and the new joint Crown-council agency Regenerate Christchurch will take over.
The survey, conducted in September and October this year, found there had been a evident dip in optimism over the last 12 to 18 months, particularly among those living in the city.
It was clear residents were frustrated with the speed of the rebuild while others said they wanted "less bureaucracy and more focus on improving community facilities", the survey's findings said.
Loss of recreational facilities and ongoing dealings with the Earthquake Commission and private insurers followed as people's biggest grievances.
Being in a damaged environment and surrounded by construction work remained the biggest gripe with a fifth of people saying it affected their lives negatively, down from just under a third of people in 2012.
The survey showed 77 per cent of respondents reported a positive quality of life, down slightly on April 2015 but up from 74 per cent in September 2012.
Buck said the council's $635 million pre-Christmas insurance settlement had given it greater financial clarity and should allow it to reduce this year's forecast rate increase.
Over the next 12 months construction companies will be working flat out in the retail precinct to deliver the first in a series of multimillion-dollar developments that will bring people and businesses back into the central city in numbers not seen since the earthquakes.
With construction in the precinct in full swing, the first new building will be finished next month with more to follow during 2016 and 2017.
Tenants have now signed up for much of the office and street-facing shop space in the retail precinct.
Smaller office spaces and shops and cafes in side lanes are taking longer to fill and some owners are reportedly offering inducements.
Construction of Christchurch's new multimillion dollar sports hub is expected to start in July next year.
As of November 11, the project had a funding shortfall of $3.95m, but Sport New Zealand was working to engage four major national funders to match its $1m contribution.
Andre Lovatt was named on Friday as chairman of Regenerate Christchurch, the new agency set up by jointly by the Government and the Christchurch City Council to lead the city's post-quake regeneration when the Canterbury Earthquake Authority ceases to exist in April.
Lovatt's appointment was approved by both Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee and Christchurch mayor Lianne Dalziel.
This year will also bring the opening of The Piano, a new $14m music centre in Armagh St, central Christchurch.
It is due to open in July and will provide world-class facilities for music and the performing arts.
Construction of Christchurch's new central city library is also scheduled to start this year.
By year's end the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team, which is funded by the council and the Government, should have completed its work on repairing and rebuilding the city's damaged roads and underground pipes and most of the roading changes planned for the central city should also be nearing completion.
Work on the new Port Hills mountain bike park will also start this year with the aim of having it open by December.
After the quakes badly damaged the library, the council's original intention was to repair it, but it was forced to drop that plan when the Government released its blueprint for the central city.
The Government committed to providing a 2725 square metre site on the corner of Gloucester and Colombo streets for the new library and to sourcing $10 million of philanthropic funding.
Christchurch's Bridge of Remembrance will be fixed in time for Anzac Day.
After $6.7 million of heavy lifting, the Government set an Anzac Day deadline to apply the final touches to the earthquake-damaged bridge.
Associate Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Minister Nicky Wagner unveiled the war memorial's new design after more than two years of strengthening work.
The bridge was damaged in the earthquakes, but has since had repairs and strengthening work carried out on the Triumphal Arch and the foundation structure to ensure it is safe.
The Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuilt Team (Scirt) and Downer Group started repairs in May 2013 — a technically challenging task that involved 3D modelling, laser surveying and confined work spaces. They completed it in September.
Christchurch RSA president Pete Dawson said the organisation was initially angry to hear little work would be done to repair the bridge in 2011.
Two major Christchurch rebuild projects had serious flaws in their leadership, creating tense and unpleasant working conditions in one and risking total failure in the other, a report says.
Council facilities and infrastructure director David Adamson said changes were made after damning findings by the Auditor-General last year.
The 100-day blueprint that guides the Christchurch rebuild actually took 67 days to produce and "20-something" days of actual design work, an architect involved said.
The blueprint was unveiled in July 2012 and will radically alter the size and content of central Christchurch.
After the building was destroyed by earthquakes in February and June 2011, the state-owned agency estimated the cost of a complete rebuild was about $5m, national business manager Julie Rowan said.
EQC chairman Maarten Wevers told Parliament's finance and expenditure committee on Wednesday "the end is nigh" for earthquake repairs, with 97.7 per cent of repairs under the Canterbury home repair programme now completed.
However, Simpson said the EQC had only just got approval for its liquefaction claim policy, and was yet to develop a calculation for how to handle the "overlap" of both flooding and liquefaction risk at some properties.
The auditor-general yesterday released a report into EQC's management of the Canterbury home repair programme, which found homeowners had experienced "inconsistency in information", long periods without specific information from EQC about their claim, leading to a "lack of certainty while waiting for repairs".
It found about 20 per cent of homeowners with repairs completed in 2013 were dissatisfied with the quality of repairs or the time taken to complete repairs after work has started.
By June 2013, EQC had repaired more than 40,000 homes just over half of the homes for which it is managing repairs at a cost of about $1.5 billion.
Gap Filler's urban regeneration began on November 25, 2010, when an empty site on Colombo St was transformed into a space hosting a temporary garden cafe, petanque court, live music and an outdoor cinema.
The multibillion-dollar programme to fix Christchurch's broken roads, bridges, footpaths and underground pipes is more than three-quarters complete.
The Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt), which is funded by the council and the Government, has completed 78 per cent of its repair and the rebuild programme and is on track to have the balance of its work wrapped up by the end of next year.
As at the end of August it had repaired or replaced 420km of wastewater pipe, 42km of stormwater pipe, 79km of freshwater pipe, and more than 1 million square metres of road. It has also fixed or replaced 84 pump stations and reservoirs, 126 bridges and culverts, and 124 retaining walls.
Scirt's priority had been to the fix the worst of the damage first, starting in the east, but as the programme moved towards conclusion more work would start to be done in the western parts of the city.
With most of the major repair projects either completed or under way, some lower priority jobs could be tackled.
Central Christchurch's $123-million street repair programme is nearing completion but frustrations will persist for motorists travelling within the four avenues.
The Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt) has practically wrapped up projects focused on repairing the CBD's quake-damaged waste, storm and freshwater pipelines, nine months after then executive general manager Duncan Gibb predicted 90 per cent of the work would be completed by last Christmas.
Debate over the scope of improvements also slowed the rebuild process.
There's still discussions between the Government and the council as to exactly what's going to be done under the rebuild programme
Scirt has so far repaired 15 bridges, including key spans over the Avon River on Colombo, Armagh, Manchester and Madras streets.
Co-ordinating work with the Christchurch City Council, Christchurch Transport Operations Centre and the Central Christchurch Development Unit's (CCDU) Accessible City traffic masterplan also contributed to irritation from motorists, Campbell said.
Campbell sympathised with motorists soon after queues formed on Tuam St early Thursday when overnight resealing work interrupted peak hour travel until the crew ran out of asphalt.
Roading construction company Fulton Hogan expects to see a downturn in Canterbury work from the end of 2016 as quake repairs are completed.
But Fulton Hogan managing director Nick Miller said there would probably be at least five extra years of repairs needed to get Christchurch roads back to prequake standards, following the dissolution of SCIRT.
Money to repair Christchurch roads has been running out, but councillors say too often residents are being told their roads will not be fixed under the Scirt programme because the damage is not considered earthquake related.
About 12 million litres of water went down Christchurch drains in 2014 because of damage caused by road works, demolitions and construction.
Scirt is made up of five construction companies and funded by taxpayers and ratepayers. The organisation has been fixing the Christchurch's roads, water, wastewater and sewerage networks since the earthquakes.
The council has budgeted $1.1 billion towards the cost of repairing Christchurch's earthquake damaged sewer, water and stormwater network.
The Government is meeting 60 per cent of the cost of rebuilding the underground pipes and 83 per cent of the cost of fixing the roads, but its contribution has been capped at a maximum of $1.8 billion.
Latest figures show that 39 per cent of the wastewater pipes, 64 per cent of the water pipes, 52 per cent of the stormwater pipes, 26 per cent of the roads and 29 per cent of the bridges damaged in the earthquakes have been repaired so far, at a cost of $930 million.
The Government's Blueprint plan to rebuild central Christchurch looks to be stalling.
About a year and a half since the Blueprint was first announced in July, 2012, and there are now 118 building projects progressed at least as far as the architects' sketches and consent applications.
We are standing on the freshly grassed East Frame, the seven downtown blocks between Manchester and Madras St that the Government took to give the rebuilt central city a sharply defined margin.
Following the February, 2011, earthquake, the Government passed the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act (CER Act) which required Christchurch City Council (CCC) to produce a recovery plan for the devastated central business district (CBD).
After hasty public consultation, the council delivered a two volume draft in nine months.
The council was tasked to produce its master plan while the city was still burying its dead, still experiencing the further destruction of major aftershocks in June and December 2011.
Mood affected decision making.
With a recovery, pre-existing projects pop out of the woodwork.
Before the earthquakes, a long-running struggle over the future of the city had been going on with business leaders feeling the council had become an inward-looking bureaucracy, stuck in an eternal planning loop and favouring certain developers.
A plan which could be cobbled together at speed because there was already a pre-quake wishlist of projects, but also an underlying political fragmentation that was never properly addressed.
The frustrating thing is we haven't been able to spend $1 in development so far.
The Triangle Centre's Michael Ogilvie-Lee, who had plans for a $100m shop and office complex in the Blueprint's retail precinct, abruptly sold up and pulled out, saying the going had become too hard.
Others, like Harcourts' Collins, are vocal in their unhappiness.
Howe says despite Isaacs' bland assurances of developments charging ahead, private sector investment has stalled largely because of uncertainty over the actual detail of the public sector anchor projects.
For the first half of 2013, the Government and CCC were locked in a protracted closed door wrangle over cost-sharing the question of who was going to pay for facilities like the arts precinct or rugby stadium.
It took until October 2013 some further 15 months for the CCDU to confirm even the general outline of street layouts and parking rules.
Yet then the complaint became development was being paralysed by the central city's high property prices.
Others remark on the success of the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt), the alliance formed between the authorities and the construction industry to fix the city's broken roads and pipes.
The New Zealand Transport Authority had pre-quake experience of industry alliances.
So a basis of trust existed and different choices were made.
With the Blueprint at a standstill, the city's lawyers, accountants and other prime tenants have been signing long leases on new buildings outside its Green Frame perimeter.
Townsend says there are calls to scrap the Blueprint, give up on its high ambitions, and let property owners go back to rebuilding on an individual commercial basis.
Too many potential tenants have signed five to 10-year leases outside the Blueprint and so cannot even think of a return until the 2020s.
An independent expert has put the price of fixing Christchurch's earthquake-damaged horizontal infrastructure at $2.9 billion.
The city council's hope of getting more money from the Government for fixing Christchurch's damaged roads and underground pipes have been dealt a blow.
An independent review into the cost of fixing the city's horizontal infrastructure the roads, footpaths, bridges and underground pipes has concluded the $1.8 billion committed by the Government and the $1.14b from the Christchurch City Council should be enough to do the work required to restore functionality.
An independent review into the cost of fixing the city's horizontal infrastructure the roads, footpaths, bridges and underground pipes has concluded the $1.8 billion committed by the Government and the $1.14b from the Christchurch City Council should be enough to do the work required to restore functionality.
Road closures and cones remain a common sight around the city but the repair programme is on schedule to be completed by the end of 2016.
Road closures and cones remain a common sight around the city but the repair programme is on schedule to be completed by the end of 2016.
Initially it was estimated the bill for repairs would top $3 billion but on Tuesday Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said the work would be completed for $2.69b.
Initially it was estimated the bill for repairs would top $3 billion but on Tuesday Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee said the work would be completed for $2.69b.
Initially the council estimated it would cost $3.2b, but when the Cost Sharing Agreement was signed only $2.9b was set aside for the work.
The council argued that was insufficient, but an independent report earlier this year by Auckland engineer Elena Trout concluded the $2.9b figure was correct.
Christchurch Central Development Unit director Baden Ewart said the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt) had managed to shave $46m off the cost of repairing the underground pipes used to carry water, wastewater and stormwater.
Scirt has worked really really hard to get good value for money
The deadline to finish most of central Christchurch's significant underground repair work has been pushed out by another three months.
Scirt executive general manager Ian Campbell said the deadline had now been pushed out to the end of September because some projects had been delayed and some extra work had been added in.
The June 2015 goal had been set about 18 months earlier and Scirt was able to get 96 per cent of its work done by then, which was "pretty close", Campbell said.
About $116 million had been spent so far, and the remaining work included projects mainly in the southeast of the central city.
As of the end of June, Scirt had completed the following work in central Christchurch: 50 kilometres of wastewater pipes 12km of storm water pipes 6km of freshwater pipes Nine pump stations 15 bridges (including eight major repairs).
Cera (Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority), Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt), Environment Canterbury (ECan), New Zealand Transport Agency, Earthquake Commission, Central Christchurch Development Unit, insurers and loss adjusters, and international investors (governments and conglomerates) now interact, and fail to interact, to determine the Christchurch Central Recovery Plan, the Land Use Recovery Plan, anchor projects such as a new stadium, precincts, demolition of privately owned buildings, and the red zoning of privately owned properties.
At present, the Christchurch City Council has limited powers to control the projects which it is forced to pay for.
The question is that at present, the population is suffering taxation without representation.
With their infrastructure affected by these works, operators like Orion and Chorus have used the rebuild works as an opportunity to upgrade their assets and charge these costs to Cera, that is, the CCC, that is, the ratepayer.
Most of central Christchurch's significant underground repair work should be finished by the end of the month.
The Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt) is aiming to have its biggest earthquake repair projects completed by the end of June to free up access for the city's "vertical rebuild".
Scirt transport planning manager Colin Hey said the agency had completed 94 per cent of its underground projects within the "core CBD" by the end of May.
After the end of June, works traffic restrictions should noticeably begin to ease up again.
The extra work this month had increased travel time on Moorhouse Ave to an average of 15 to 25 minutes during peak travel periods.
The June 2013 cost-sharing agreement that fixed the price of infrastructure repairs and anchor project investments was the clear turning point, Manji says.
The Government knew from 2012 there was likely to be a large funding gap and the council was going to have to start looking for the extra cash from ratepayers, or from debt and selling assets.
But by late 2012, it was realised the bill was likely to be double the early estimates.
Scirt was told to recost the repairs based on what it would take to get the infrastructure back to an average pre-quake level of service, not what it would require to fix completely.
A nasty pre-Christmas surprise is on the way for cash-strapped Christchurch ratepayers, with the Government about to hand a $75 million bill to the Christchurch City Council for repairs to earthquake-damaged roads and underground pipes
The Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt) has spent $46m less than predicted on freshwater, wastewater and stormwater pipes, due to using new technologies, an actual rate of inflation lower than originally expected and finding less damage than initially thought.
At the same time as overall repair costs have fallen, the Government decided in April last year it had overfunded the Scirt programme to the tune of $150m.
The Crown has now made it clear the council is liable for $75m more in funding for Scirt.
The final lap in the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team quake-rebuild programme is on schedule to finish in December 2016.
The five-year programme is now 85 per cent complete, with $322 million worth of major projects expected to be completed this year.
By September 2015, Scirt had completed almost all of its original programme of work in Christchurch's CBD to clear the way for the city's vertical rebuild.
The Crown buyout offers for 37 North Canterbury properties in Kaiapoi, Pines Beach and Kairaki Beach have either expired or been declined and an estimated 30 families remain in the district's red zones.
the removal of our essential services" and "constant unwanted calls" from Government officials about accepting the Crown's buyout offer.
Experts said earlier this month that unless more money was made available to fix cracked underground pipes, filthy wastewater leaks into city waterways could continue for another 10 years.
The cost-sharing agreement (CSA) signed in June 2013 provided for the Crown and the council to split the HI programme costs 60/40, but the Crown capped its contribution at $1.8b.
Brownlee said yesterday the HI network would be at least equal to what it was before the quakes and rejected the claim the council was going to be burdened with extra costs.
A lack of parking and access to his PC Plus business because of road works and traffic cones has caused tension levels to rise both with Hodgson and those he has asked for better roading and parking planning.
This week Hodgson was faced with the latest issue dozens of road cones running from the intersection of Kilmore and Barbadoes sts south past the computer build and repair business he runs from a residential address.
Matters came to a head on Tuesday when he only did $5 worth of business while a City Care road infrastructure and Christchurch City Council road management contractors were busy outside, he says.
After September 4 the company had about 500 staff working to restore infrastructure, and more than 1200 after February 22.
Traffic congestion this morning was so severe for those heading into the central city that gridlocked passengers were forced to leave buses and walk while locked-in motorists crossed pavements to escape.
He said there were currently 40 work crews within the Four Avenues.
Councillor Ali Jones took to Twitter to express her frustration at the gridlocked traffic.
Its revenue jumped 50 per cent between the 2011 and 2012 financial years, gaining more contracts around the country and a lot of earthquake repair work.
In November, 31 per cent of consents issued were for affordable homes, but the rate dropped to between 14 and 21 per cent each month this year.
Tall buildings demolished in Christchurch have been recycled as fertiliser, farm bridges and mulch, while $200,000 of recovered office equipment has been donated to local schools.
The recycling rate for large buildings such as the PWC tower, Holiday Inn, Farmer's car park building and Clarendon Tower is at least 90 per cent, according to demolition firms.
The last of the chemical disposal tanks that were installed in Christchurch after the February 2011 earthquake have been removed.
More than 500 tanks were put in place around the city after the earthquake but many had not been used since 2011.
More than 500 tanks were put in place around the city after the earthquake but many had not been used since 2011.
Since the September 4, 2010 earthquake City Care has been on the frontline of the emergency earthquake response repairing potholes, clearing and repairing roads and bridges, making safe parks and buildings and making the city more livable for traumatised residents of Christchurch following the earthquakes.
Since the September 4, 2010 earthquake City Care has been on the frontline of the emergency earthquake response repairing potholes, clearing and repairing roads and bridges, making safe parks and buildings and making the city more livable for traumatised residents of Christchurch following the earthquakes.
And the new council table, led by Mayor Lianne Dalziel, has been elected on the promise of achieving radical transformation despite finding a half-billion-dollar gap in its budget and Earthquake Recovery Minister Gerry Brownlee reluctant to release his grip on the city.
Parklands and North New Brighton residents have won the battle to stop underground wastewater tanks being installed on their properties.
After the quakes the council decided it would be best to replace the badly-damaged gravity-fed sewer system with a pressure wastewater system that relied on underground wastewater tanks in parts of the city considered at high risk of liquefaction.
But the $82 million project upset some residents who were troubled by the prospect of having the tanks of their land.
In mid 2013 Richmond resident Andrew Bailey sought a High Court application for a judicial review of the council's decision to implement the new pressure system in his area.
The court ruled that the council's decision not to consult property owners in Richmond before it made its decision to install the new wastewater system was flawed.
Following that decision Bailey, acting on behalf of the Concerned Christchurch Citizens Group, filed another application for a judicial review of the council's decision in relation to seven other areas.
The council has now decided that it will not extend the pressure wastewater network any further into area and that it will instead repair the damaged gravity sewer system, saving itself around $40m in capital expenditure.
Heavy detoured traffic through Celia St in Sumner because of roadworks is annoying some local residents because of ground vibrations.
Untreated sewage has leaked into a Hagley Park stretch of the Avon River.
Christchurch City Council water and waste manager Mark Christison said the water had become polluted because of a sewage leak caused by vandalism of wastewater pipes that were being repaired by the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt).
Parklands resident Karen Brandon, with children Charlotte Bracefield, 7, and Elizabeth Bracefield, 9, is unhappy with the new wastewater system authorities are insisting upon.
Thousands of Christchurch homeowners must have wastewater tanks installed because of the risk of liquefaction.
The Christchurch City Council, the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team and the Government will spend more than $82 million installing wastewater tanks at about 5500 homes as part of new pressure sewer systems being introduced to some parts of the city.
Council water and waste manager Mark Christison said parts of Parklands, Woolston, Halswell and areas near the river and close to the red zone would require the new system.
Some residents, however, say they are concerned about electricity costs, where the tank will go and how to deal with the alarm system attached to it.
Parklands resident Karen Brandon said she was unhappy with the lack of options, hurried time frame and "loss of democracy".
The Christchurch City Council's decision to halt the roll-out of its controversial new wastewater system in several suburbs is causing delays for the city's infrastructure repair programme.
The council's wastewater rethink was prompted by Richmond resident Andrew Bailey's successful High Court application for a judicial review of the council's decision to implement the new pressure system, which replaces the gravity system traditionally used, in the Richmond area.
The court ruled that the council's decision not to consult property owners in that area before it made its decision to install the new wastewater system was flawed.
Following that decision Bailey, acting on behalf of the Concerned Christchurch Citizens Group, filed another application for a judicial review of the council's decision in relation to seven other areas.
Before that application could be heard, the council decided to halt the roll-out in areas where work on pressure wastewater installation had not begun and no consents had been received.
It is continuing work on installing the new pressure wastewater system, which involves putting underground sewer tanks on individual properties, in other parts of the city. In Brooklands, Halswell, Hoon Hay, Southshore, Woolston, Shirley, Richmond, East Avondale, Parklands/Queenspark and New Brighton about 800 tanks have already been installed.
From a technical point of view, a strong rationale still existed for introducing a pressure wastewater system but it was clear fresh engagement with the affected communities was needed.
The Gloucester St bridge has been closed to traffic for more than three months.
A report prepared for today's Christchurch City Council meeting says the council faces significant costs to bring its quake damaged or declining bridges up to full standard.
About 10 per cent of its 367 bridges including the Gloucester St bridge require replacement or extensive repairs.
At present there was insufficient funding in the Three Year Plan for that work, the report said.
The council closed the 127-year-old bridge, which crosses the Avon River near Durham St, to vehicles on June 26 after engineers found that bolts pinning the structure together had sheared and further failure could result.
Council road assets operation manager Malcolm Park said yesterday both temporary measures and comprehensive permanent repairs were in the option design stage.
The Stronger Canterbury Infrastructure Rebuild Team (SCIRT), an alliance of five companies, rebuilding Christchurch's sewer, stormwater, water and roading networks has been awarded the Champion Canterbury Supreme Award medium-large enterprise.
Repairs to a Riccarton road bridge could cause major headaches for people travelling between the central city and Christchurch's western suburbs over the next two months.
About 12 million litres of water went down Christchurch drains in 2014 because of damage caused by road works, demolitions and construction.
The organisation has been fixing the Christchurch's roads, water, wastewater and sewerage networks since the earthquakes.
A push to hire 1000 more workers by Christmas for the $2.2 billion repair of Christchurch infrastructure kicks off next month.
Scirt needs skilled workers for the repair of waterpipes, sewers, stormwater drains and roads.
Scirt had recently moved from the emergency repairs phase to long-term projects.
Scirt was doing 80 projects now and hoped to have 150 projects on the go in the city by early next year.
Sewers, water and stormwater had to be done before roads.
More than half the $1.4 billion spent so far on fixing Christchurch's damaged infrastructure has been used for the eastern suburbs, but frustrated residents want authorities to do more.
On Saturday, Dalziel choked back tears at a Long Term Plan hearing after reading submissions from those who elected her mayor to stand up for the east.
esidents are frustrated by the slow pace of recovery and the lack of proposed city council spending in New Brighton and surrounding suburbs.
Figures released on Monday by the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt) show it has, to date, spent around $800 million fixing the area's damaged broken roads, bridges and underground pipes.
Scirt figures show about $800m spent on the three eastern areas to date.
Of the 225 bridge structures in Christchurch, about 140 required some level of repair after the 2010 and 2011 earthquakes.
Workers have repaired or replaced 262km of wastewater pipe, 355,433sqm of road, and 80 per cent of design work is done.
The entire programme is 47 per cent complete.
A $400 million shortfall in funding for quake-damaged roads and underground pipes in Christchurch could force authorities to abandon or re-think some projects.
About $1.56 billion has already been spent on fixing Christchurch's broken roads and pipes but there is still another $1.77 billion worth of work that needs doing.
About 1000 kilometres (45 per cent) of Christchurch's street network sustained significant damage in the earthquakes, requiring some 50,000 repairs.
Christchurch street and sewer repairs risk being disrupted by "limited involvement" from the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera), an Auditor-General report says.
The report released yesterday praised the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt) a multi-agency partnership charged with the estimated $2.6 billion repair of the city's horizontal infrastructure for creating efficiencies resulting in "good oversight and reduced costs".
However, the report highlighted two "major risks" that could disrupt the rebuild and made it difficult for Scirt to "confidently put the right infrastructure in the right places to the right standard".
It is the second Auditor-General report in two weeks to criticise a government agency involved in the Christchurch rebuild, after the Earthquake Commission was slated for poor communication and inconsistent dealings with quake-affected Cantabrians.
Protracted decision-making, especially in the central city, could gradually reduce Scirt's ability to deliver repairs, the report said.
There is no coherent framework for measuring Scirt's performance.
Co-ordination between Scirt, Cera and the Christchurch Central Development Unit has been "problematic".
Because no decisions have been made about the future of red-zone land and flood defence options, stormwater and street repair works will be delayed.
A third of the repair jobs to earthquake-damaged infrastructure in the Waimakariri district are behind schedule.
The estimated total repair bill to fix assets including water, sewerage and wastewater systems has also jumped by $8.7 million, but council staff are confident work will finish as forecast without costing ratepayers any more.
Three have finished and 14 are yet to start, but of the remaining 25, 14 are behind programme.
Increased costs were due to market changes and "a better understanding" of the work required, he said.
The Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt) said one lane of Main Rd would be closed from Monday while Fulton Hogan installed a new wastewater pressure main pipe between McCormacks Bay Rd and the Moa Cave in Redcliffs.
An earthquake-damaged bridge in Christchurch will be closed to all traffic from this weekend as the final stage of repair work gets under way.
Work to repair the quake-damaged structure began almost two years ago and included jacking it off its abutments onto temporary structures at the end of 2013.
The major repair project was originally expected to cost about $10 million and be finished in August last year, but that was later pushed out to $16.6m and the work was now expected to be completed in April this year.
Overhead power lines built in eastern Christchurch after the February 2011 earthquake will not be taken down this year as first planned.
Lines company Orion installed temporary high voltage overhead lines in eastern Christchurch as an emergency measure after the February 22, 2011, earthquake.
Some residents expressed concerns about the overhead lines when they were installed, running past about 400 homes, but Orion said the move was necessary to ensure there was a secure supply of power to thousands of households in the area.
The company planned to remove the overhead lines once replacement cables were established underground, but the work had been delayed by bridge repairs in Dallington and New Brighton.
A six-week wastewater main installation project began last week on the street between Bealey Ave and Beveridge St.
New Brighton residents will have to find new ways to get in and out of their suburb as major infrastructure repairs begin on key roads.
More than 20 additional Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt) crews will be working in the central city from next month and by March will be on almost every street.
The intensive period of work is likely to continue for up to nine months.
Repair work on and below earthquake-hit roads is ramping up, meaning more, rather than less, frustration for drivers negotiating cramped streets clogged with traffic.
On the plus side, motorists have won praise from police for their patience with the ever-changing labyrinth on Christchurch's streets.
A new wastewater pipe will be installed in Birmingham Dr in Middleton from today to service planned growth areas in the city's southwest.
Yesterday, work starting in Moorhouse Ave meant restricted access to Manchester and Madras streets. That project will take a fortnight.
Road rage had not noticeably increased despite "congestion in places there never used to be", Sergeant Pete Daly said.
Forty-nine per cent of the 359 people in the Opinions Market Research survey say the Christchurch Central Development Unit (CCDU) of the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) should be in charge of the rebuild, while only 21 per cent thought it should be the job of the city council.
Canterbury lines company Orion New Zealand rated highly in the eyes of 92 per cent of respondents, as did the Stronger Christchurch Infrastructure Rebuild Team (Scirt), with 88 per cent saying its work was good.
In terms of business and community organisations, the Student Volunteer Army ranked top, with 99 per cent acclaiming it and saying its work was good.
Views on city councillors were less rosy and split 43 per cent each way on whether their performance was good or poor.
Only 34 per cent said insurance companies had done a good job, with 21 per cent thinking their work had been "quite good".
Greater Christchurch residents gave the raspberry to their insurers, with 64 per cent saying they had performed poorly – 19 per cent considering it extremely poor, 14 per cent very poor and 28 per cent quite poor.
Poll respondents rated Cera above the council, with 68 per cent saying it was carrying out good work, and support from central government was also highly rated, considered good by 67 per cent and poor by 30 per cent.
Church groups had performed well in the eyes of 76 per cent, while only 46 per cent said the same of the Canterbury Employers' Chamber of Commerce. Forty per cent did not know.
On the other hand, Fletcher EQR and the Earthquake Commission (EQC) had average ratings, with 49 per cent each considering their work good.
Opinions Market Research director Karen Selway said the ratings for the groups appeared to highlight "helpful supportive volunteers versus slow-moving bureaucrats".
After a year of detours and road cones, Christchurch's Pages Rd will re-open to two-way traffic on Friday.
Eastbound traffic had been detoured along Wainoni Rd since January, with a large part of the main route reduced to one way heading toward the city centre.
New Brighton business owner Nikki Griffin said it had been hard for people to travel into the seaside suburb, making them "frustrated".
So many older people were not coming to shop in New Brighton because of the detours having to negotiate them and get it right, only to have it change again.
Nearly 2 kilometres of Pages Rd, from Anzac Dr to Cowles Stadium, was closed to eastbound traffic in January 2015 as Scirt continued its massive $90 million project to install a resilient vacuum wastewater system in the quake-smacked eastern suburbs.
The end of the year brought good tidings with the opening of the Margaret Mahy playground — what a present for the city's children and their parents — and the Christchurch Art Gallery.
The council also settled its insurance claims ending a chapter of under-insurance of council assets, endless disputes and terrible mistakes.
The Avon remains beautiful but with 8 billion litres of wastewater dumped into it since the quakes, it is so toxic people were warned about even boating on it.
Redcliffs School spent months campaigning to go back to its Main Rd site, only to be told in March that Education Minister Hekia Parata proposed to close the school.
In February, Parata also put an end to years in limbo for Avonside Girls' and Shirley Boys' high schools when announcing quake-damaged Queen Elizabeth II Park would become their new shared home.
The year was marked by frosty relations between the Canterbury District Health Board (CDHB) and the Government.
The cracks began to show in March when the CDHB went public with its financial woes, saying it would post a $45m blow-out in the next 10 years without financial assistance.
Health Minister Jonathan Coleman and Finance Minister Bill English ordered a financial review of the CDHB's finances after it posted a $17.9m deficit for the year to June 30.
The $80,000 review by PWC found the CDHB's finances were stable and the Government announced an extra $16m of funding.
The first stage of the new Acute Services Building, part of a $650m hospital revamp, was completed.
The $13.4m Kaikoura Integrated Family Health Centre opened and in November the ribbon was cut on the Rangiora health hub which will cater North Canterbury's growing population, especially in the maternity area.
Mental health rates soared during the year, a rise clinicians half expected as Canterbury people entered their most vulnerable point in the recovery.
The big event of the year was only days ago with the opening of the better-than-ever Christchurch Art Gallery.
Having the gallery back in swing makes the city feel slightly more whole again.
During public discussions about the Regenerate Christchurch bill, which will set up the new agency, one thing became clear: the environment, mentioned only once or twice in the bill, would not be a key part of the city's future.
It capped off another bad year for the environment in Canterbury.
In October, the State of the Environment report, the first of its kind in many years, was a scathing assessment of the expanding dairy industry and its role in declining ecological health.
Mental illness is continuing to soar in post-quake Christchurch.
As the region's health board struggles to keep up with demand and rates seem set to increase for years to come, ASHLEIGH STEWART speaks to people trying to overcome the stigma and challenges that surround mental health.
Secondary stressors are far worse than living through the earthquakes . . . and a lot of people feel really let down by the authorities and the Government.
He worried about the "real divide" that was developing in Christchurch between those who had resolved their earthquake issues and those who had not.
Our research has shown that a lot of people are distancing themselves from people who they see as "a drain", those people who are struggling which is the worst news.
The latest All Right? survey showed fatigue to be a major problem, with about 70 per cent of Cantabrians identifying themselves as "tired".
It comes as the campaign a joint initiative by the Canterbury District Health Board (CDHB) and the Mental Health Foundation of New Zealand and funded by the Ministry of Health expected a funding cut.
She said three aspects of the quakes anxious and depressed children, the loss of a functioning city centre and mistrust in people's environment would lead to trauma lingering longer than initially thought.
A recent $16 million funding announcement by Health Minister Jonathan Coleman would cover only the CDHB's forecasted deficit.
Mental illness rates are soaring as Canterbury enters the "most vulnerable point" in its post-earthquake recovery.
The Canterbury District Health Board's top clinicians say more children are presenting with "fear and anxiety" as the region grapples with the aftermath of the 2010-11 earthquakes.
In the last three years , there has been a 39 per cent increase in adult and a 60 per cent leap in child and youth wanting mental health help.
Ballooning demand for mental health services was one of the main drivers to the board's $17.9 million deficit for the last financial year — $5.3m more than predicted.
The most common mental health problems for Cantabrians are depression and anxiety.
Health officials say the problems will increase or continue on the current level for at least another five years, with extra money likely needed.
Canterbury District Health Board chief of psychiatry Sue Nightingale said a significant increase "we weren't prepared for" was the number of middle-aged women using mental health services.
We're probably at our most vulnerable point in terms of recovery.
Cantabrians have made impassioned pleas to central Government to relinquish control of the city and let them have a greater say in its future.
The Local Government and Environment Committee heard submissions on the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Bill from about 40 groups and individuals on Friday.
The bill will replace the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act, which expires in April next year.
Overwhelming themes from the submissions were less government control, more local collaboration and a greater respect for environmental issues.
Many submitters spoke of being frustrated with the recovery so far, describing a passive city which had things done to it by central Government, rather than a city planned from within.
Gerry Brownlee will retain most of the power under new legislation governing the next five years of Canterbury's earthquake recovery.
The Government has released its finalised Transition Recovery Plan and the new legislation behind it – the Greater Christchurch Regeneration Bill – passed its first reading in the House on Thursday.
The bill allows for changes to approved recovery plans, paving the way for central city anchor projects to be rethought or even scrapped.
People are suffering because they’ve lost the intimacy of their relationships.
They aren't emotionally available to each other for a while, says Dr Rob Gordon, an Australian disaster psychologist advising Cera.
In terms of mental health, greater Christchurch remains in the thick of it.
And the general finding is that Christchurch is about where we would predict for mental trauma.
Much of the city is still going through a process of change and the psychology of that needs to be understood.
Starting with the raw impact, Bell says the data shows that Christchurch is seeing an 8 per cent overall increase in mental health disorders – feelings of anxiety, depression and trauma that are serious enough to warrant medical treatment.
But for those with high quake exposure, depression rates jumped to 19 per cent.
And even for those with a moderate exposure to the quake, it remained around the same.
Then for post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), it was a 1.7 per cent rate for those not in Christchurch, leaping to 5.2 per cent for those with the highest exposure.
The results taken overall – including anxiety disorders, nicotine dependency and suicidal thoughts – show that the highly exposed group had 1.4 times the usual risk for developing some form of clinical-level response.
She says this may explain another feature of the earthquakes – the degree to which older people turned out to be more resilient.
But again, she says, the general finding is that despite a sizeable jump in serious mental illness, it is not the majority experience.
Bell says there was only a brief spike in the use of sedatives and anxiety combating drugs.
These have since returned to routine pre-quake levels.
Even more surprisingly, anti-depressant drug use never really took off.
A lot of Christchurch is still in that mental space says Gordon, particularly where people are locked in their insurance battles, waiting for new homes to be built or camped in old ones needing to be repaired.
But also there is the generalised stress of living in a city with broken roads, messed-up traffic, a cloud of uncertainty hanging over the central city rebuild, the loss of many of the familiar patterns of life.
So even while in the context of a world disaster, Christchurch's stresses might seem at the milder end of the spectrum – the daily unpredictability of the traffic, the wondering when the insurer is going to cough up some money – Gordon says their seriousness should not be underplayed.
If it is not the fate of your house that obsesses you, it could still be the fate of the Cathedral or the east of the city that weighs heavy.
Iafeta says within days of the February 2011 earthquake, the Government came out with its "no questions" jobs support package.
On the other hand, the last survey showed a rise in acute mental health issues in local teenagers.
When Cera ran its Summer of Fun programme of barbecues and other neighbourhood activities, there were the criticisms that the money should be spent on fixing roads and homes.
So now the Government works mostly through NGOs and community groups, funding their work.
In the weeks following Christchurch’s devastating earthquake in 2011, in which 185 people were killed and large portions of the CBD were levelled, there was no way to drive through the city.
For months stretching into years, it remained nearly impossible to navigate the city without having to divert into myriad detours before eventually arriving at your destination.
One of the resounding calls from the public was that it wanted a greener and more people-focused city – and one of the more obvious ways to achieve this was to invest in cycling infrastructure.
The Christchurch City Council has admitted it could take 30 years before the city's sewage system is returned to a pre-earthquake condition.
Earlier this year, the government said it would not be contributing any more to the repair of the city's sewer and stormwater pipes, despite the council saying it required another $400 million to return things to a pre-quake condition.
He said the plan was to get the most out of the existing system and then, over the next 30 years, bring things back to where they were before the quakes.
Canterbury university professor and water expert Bryan Jenkins said, while water quality in the two rivers had improved compared to immediately following the earthquakes, it was still not recommended for swimming or even boating.
If you look at the most recent summary of results for water quality in Christchurch city rivers, nearly all the sites show a significant increase in the bacterial contamination compared to pre-quake circumstances, even now.
Big temporary powerlines that brought desperately needed electricity to quake-hit residents in Christchurch's eastern suburbs are finally being removed.
Nearly five years after they went up, Orion has begun the slow task of pulling down the temporary powerlines.
In the aftermath of the February quake, the cables brought electricity to 20,000 customers who at that stage still had no water and no sewerage.
Under the leadership of former boss Roger Sutton, Orion began putting the lines to replace the underground cables just five days after the quake.
The nine-kilometre network was completed less than a week later.
Mayor proposes special levy to cover Christchurch earthquake road repairs.
With no extra Crown funding likely, mayor Lianne Dalziel is proposing an infrastructure levy the equivalent of a 1.5 per cent rate rise for ratepayers to cover the extra repairs.
The original costs were calculated when only around 40 per cent of the damaged assets had been assessed and it was assumed that everything that was broken would be fixed.
Since then the design guidelines have changed and only damaged infrastructure that is considered critical to the network or likely to fail within five years is being fixed.
The Anglican Cathedral was badly damaged during the magnitude 6.3 earthquake that struck Christchurch in February 2011.
It opened its doors to worshippers in August 2013 and will be a spiritual headquarters until a permanent replacement is established.
Some of the businesses that were forced out of central Christchurch after the February 2011 disaster that killed 185 people are returning.
But the Re: Start Mall, a temporary shopping precinct made of shipping containers, which opened in late 2011 has become, like the cardboard cathedral, a symbol of ingenuity and verve.
The authorities have said the capital of New Zealand's South Island will have a "functioning" city centre within three years, forcing many companies to wait before returning to its commercial heart.
Almost three-quarters of damaged roads, water pipes and sewage systems have been repaired but reconstruction work will almost certainly take more than a decade to complete.
Christchurch has officially opened a transitional cathedral made from cardboard in Latimer Square, replacing the neo-Gothic structure destroyed in a 2011 earthquake that killed 185 people in New Zealand's second largest city.
Apart from that, however, the city’s power system was fully restored within hours, roads generally held up well and the airport was largely unscathed.
After the quake hit, an immediate priority revolved around the need to verify and shore up the structural integrity or otherwise of critical buildings and infrastructure, first in the city’s centre and subsequently in the suburbs.
It has been in a poor state for many decades, and millions of litres of wastewater dripping, trickling and streaming into the Avon since the earthquakes further degraded the waterway to the point it is not far short of what Canterbury medical officer of health Dr Alistair Humphrey calls an "open sewer.
Concerns are mounting over the scale of Canterbury's mental health problem, as suicide-related emergency calls double in the last year.
It comes as documents reveal discussions between Canterbury health officials and the Government have stalled over a discrepancy over the size of the problem.
A disagreement between the Canterbury District Health Board (CDHB), the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera), and the Ministry of Health had left authorities no closer to solving the problem.
We are acutely aware that trust is not something that is present in the Ministry of Health at present – indeed the concerning feedback from colleagues working in the Ministry is the very dysfunctional interactions within that organisation at many levels.
At present, the ongoing time-consuming, negative interactions with the Ministry leaders is sapping the time and energy that we should be using to innovate and plan for best patient care.
A paper was then sent to the Ministry on September 2, from the CDHB and Cera, intending to finalise an agreement between the three parties about the "on-going monitoring of the priority area of 'improving people's wellbeing'".
The CDHB would take over as the lead agency for Christchurch's psychosocial recovery when Cera came to an end in April.
Last week, she alerted the Ministry that the acute inpatient service was full on several days in November.
Quality of life remains at high levels in greater Christchurch according to the latest Wellbeing Survey by the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (CERA).
CERA Acting Chief Executive John Ombler says the surveys have shown a progressive improvement in peoples’ wellbeing since the earthquakes of 2010 and 2011, and it now appears to be stabilising at 77 per cent reporting a positive quality of life.
It’s great to see people continuing to feel positive about life in this city, which I’m sure has a lot to do with the progress we are seeing in our recovery from the earthquakes.
People are still facing challenges with on-going stress an issue for 20 per cent of residents.
Overall confidence in recovery decision-making has decreased.
The Ministry of Health through the Canterbury District Health Board will inherit on-going responsibility for delivering the Survey as well as the Canterbury Wellbeing Index on 1 March 2016.
43 per cent increase in adult community mental health presentations.
37 per cent increase in emergency presentations.
69 per cent increase in child and youth mental health service presentations, which would be higher without CDHB's schools programme.
65 per cent increase in rural mental health presentations.
Prior to the earthquakes, Canterbury's mental health was on a par or better than most other health districts.
Canterbury now has the highest proportion of elderly accessing mental health services and the highest proportion of Maori accessing mental health services in New Zealand.
Despite this, the Ministry of Health has refused to recognise this pressing need, and will not even fund Canterbury to the appropriate level for its population.
Although post-traumatic stress is an important issue for some people, it is other conditions, such as anxiety, depression and substance abuse which constitute the bulk of disorders several years on – moreover, the prevalence of these conditions increases in the years after a disaster.
Four years on we are in the early days of recovery, and the anxiety about aftershocks has given way to stresses about insurance, repairs and relocating offices, schools and homes.
As highlighted by the chair of Canterbury District Health Board, the Canterbury Health system has responded to New Zealand's largest ever natural disaster with less than 1 per cent of extra funding over the past four years.
However, this tiny increase in funding did not take account of the 30,000 increase in Canterbury's population in response to the rebuild.
Some of the burden on mental health services is undoubtedly caused by the lack of housing in Christchurch.
More than 98 per cent of CCC social housing was reported damaged by the earthquakes, and demolition of red zone property has led to an increased demand.
However, for those who have difficulty finding high paid employment, the double whammy of rent hikes and lack of social housing is adding to their mental health problems and at times literally driving people onto the streets.
In recent weeks the number of lower cost bond registrations has increased, which in turn suggests that low cost rentals are being freed up as people move back into earthquake-repaired houses.
The challenge facing Canterbury's mental health services is likely to persist for many years.
During the past few years there has been a huge rise in the number of Cantabrians clamouring for treatment, mostly for depression and anxiety.
In the past three years there has been a 39 per cent hike in adults and a 60 per cent rise in children and teenagers needing help.
Children are also turning up at school not school-ready because stressed parents are trying to cope with enormous changes wrought by the quakes to their jobs and their homes while juggling interminable insurance and Earthquake Commission issues.
A Canterbury University study of 300 five-year-olds shows there are more than double the percentage of children with post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms since the Canterbury earthquakes, presenting as irritability, meltdowns, clinginess, sleep problems and possibly toileting issues.
Recent mental health figures show that PTSD is five times more evident in Christchurch people exposed to the earthquakes – 5.2 per cent compared with 1.7 per cent of non-Cantabrians.
After two years of uncertainty, Christchurch is rife with anxiety and despair with more than 66,000 Cantabrians popping anti-depressant pills, mental health referrals at an all-time high and severe psychological disorders starting to emerge.
Almost 12,000 people were treated at Canterbury District Health Board (CDHB) mental health facilities from October to December 2012 and the occupancy rate of the mental health adult inpatient acute unit is about 90 per cent.
Internal Pegasus Health data analysis shows Canterbury's depression rate climbed from 9.2 per cent in 2006 to almost 12 per cent last year.
Christchurch's Pegasus Health primary care mental health service had also been hit with heavy, ongoing demand since the quakes leaping 15 per cent to 12,500 appointments last year.
Cera's 2012 wellbeing survey showed more than 50 per cent of Cantabrians believed their quality of life had deteriorated since the quakes.
Increased alcohol consumption and significantly higher levels of depression, acute stress and anxiety have been linked to residents living in worst affected areas of the quake-hit Christchurch.
The more physically affected community were dealing with ongoing daily disruptions shovelling silt from liquefaction all over again following large aftershocks, loss of utilities, living in severely damaged houses and for others relocation as their homes became uninhabitable with further quakes, loss of neighbourhood and many community social networks had gone.
The resilience of Cantabrians is under threat as anger, depression, poor health, grief, financial issues, alcohol, smoking and frustrations towards the powers that be continue to plague the earthquake-hit city, new research shows.
Life in the red zone was described as "unbearable" and respondents reported widespread dissatisfaction with the management of earthquake authorities more than two thirds believed the quakes were a "convenient excuse for the Government to pursue its own agenda".
Communication from Government agencies was described as fragmented, inconsistent, contradictory, dictatorial, hypocritical and non-democratic, and more than 60 per cent of respondents said authorities had the wrong priorities, with people being "forgotten" in the recovery.
The key findings indicate that the secondary stressors of damaged homes, insurance wrangles, financial challenges and grief over the ‘lost Christchurch' are taking its toll.
Stress and anxiety caused by dealing with authorities was "more debilitating" than the quakes, she said.
There were a record 209,000 prescriptions for anti-depressants written to the people of Christchurch last year, and the New Zealand Association of Psychotherapists has "grave concerns" for the ongoing psychological struggles of the residents of the earthquake-ravaged city.
At the organisation's annual conference over the weekend, it was concluded that the National-led Government needs to place as much emphasis on helping to rebuild the psychological health and resilience of the people of Canterbury as it did on town planning.
The National Government is continuing to try to fix the cracks and rebuild the infrastructure of the city of Christchurch, but as an organisation we are concerned that the ongoing psychological effects cannot be papered over.
Ongoing political and legal arguments about insurance claims and the 'rebuild' will only add to this emotional struggle.
Five years on, about 21 per cent of Canterbury resi­dents report high levels of stress.
A recent Canterbury DHB report also has data on higher-than-average demand for mental health services.
Information released in the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet's annual report shows Cera has failed to met key recovery standards.
The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) excels when it comes to meeting softer targets but has failed to meet key recovery milestones, according to its annual scorecard.
The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC), which monitors Cera's progress in Canterbury, has released its report for the 2015 financial year, revealing many recovery targets have not been met.
Cera achieved Government-imposed standards relating to communication, planning and progress monitoring, but fell short against more tangible targets, such as demolitions, land purchases and the construction of anchor projects.
Standards met by Cera included keeping residents informed about recovery programmes, developing a "framework for maintaining recovery momentum" beyond 2016 and supporting homeowners through the insurance repair or rebuild processes.
The Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority (Cera) has missed its demolition targets, but promises that the pace of clearance will accelerate next month.
New clearance data provided by Cera shows that more than half of the red-zoned houses have been demolished.
Figures up to March 4 show that 3920 homes have been demolished, with 3919 to go.
About 53 per cent of redzoned houses in Bexley have been demolished, compared with about 59 per cent in Burwood, but only about 5 per cent in the Heathcote Valley.
Only about a dozen Port Hills homes have been demolished.
There have been 1240 demolitions within the four avenues since the September 2010 earthquakes, compared to 292 rebuild consents where construction has started.
The number of rebuilds started to grow in June 2012 with eight a month and the peak was 18 rebuilds starting work in July 2014.
A group of 150 Canterbury homeowners will file legal proceedings in the High Court against the Earthquake Commission today.
The Treasury report found the Christchurch anchor project programme, which includes a sports facility, convention centre and a stadium, had already missed key milestones.
Families with children are doing well in most well-being indicatiors, but are under significant financial stress.
Increasing living costs are giving rise to the "middle-class poor", an expert says, as a new report shows a large chunk of Canterbury families are under financial stress.
While two-parent families with children under 18 were doing well in most well-being areas, many had "financial stresses", the report said, often due to housing.
Forty-three per cent had high housing costs, it found, and 38 per cent had housing problems.
According to the report, older couples, one or both being at least 50 years old, did well overall, rating highly on most indicators of wellbeing with 88 per cent satisfied with their standard of living.
